TITLE
Immunoprofiling of CD14+ blood monocytes upon Zika virus infection

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Blood CD14+ monocytes are the frontline immunomodulators categorized into classical, intermediate or non-classical subsets, subsequently differentiating into M1 pro- or M2 anti-inflammatory macrophages upon stimulation. While Zika virus (ZIKV) rapidly establishes viremia, the target cells and immune responses, particularly during pregnancy, remain elusive. Furthermore, it is unknown whether African- and Asian-lineage ZIKV have different phenotypic impacts on host immune responses. Using human blood infection, we identified CD14+ monocytes as the primary target for African- or Asian-lineage ZIKV infection. When immunoprofiles of human blood infected with ZIKV were compared, a classical/intermediate monocyte-mediated M1-skewed inflammation by African-lineage ZIKV infection was observed, in contrast to a non-classical monocyte-mediated M2-skewed immunosuppression by Asian-lineage ZIKV infection. Importantly, infection of pregnant women’s blood revealed enhanced susceptibility to ZIKV infection. Specifically, Asian-lineage ZIKV infection of pregnant women’s blood led to an exacerbated M2-skewed immunosuppression of non-classical monocytes in conjunction with global suppression of type I interferon-signaling pathway and an aberrant expression of host genes associated with pregnancy complications. 30 ZIKV+ sera from symptomatic pregnant patients also showed elevated levels of M2-skewed immunosuppressive cytokines and pregnancy complication-associated fibronectin-1. This study demonstrates the differential immunomodulatory responses of blood monocytes, particularly during pregnancy, upon infection with different lineages of ZIKV.

DESIGN
Whole blood infection was performed with African ZIKV (MR766) and Asian ZIKV (H/PF/2013), followed by pan monocyte isolation at 40 hours post infection (hpi). Isolated monocytes were lysed in RLT buffer at a concentration of 6500 cells/ul. A volume of 1.5 ul of cell lysate per specimen was used for NanoString nCounter assay using Human Myeloid Panel (650 genes).

