TITLE
Gene expression data from African Americans and European Americans with non-small cell lung cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Translational Relevance Historically, African Americans have been underrepresented in clinical cancer research. Diversity helps to ensure equal access to new cancer therapies and better treatment for everyone. Cancer research is increasingly focused on classifying patients according to molecular profiles for particular groups. We provide a detailed molecular analysis from paired NSCLC tissues that identified differential coding and noncoding RNA expression in NSCLC from African Americans (AA) and European Americans (EA). Similar to other tumor types, we determined that race-enriched gene and microRNA expression signatures suggest a more aggressive disease in African Americans. Based on predicted drug resistance to adjuvant chemotherapies, AA may not equally benefit from the same range of clinical drugs as EA. Our findings provide a rationale for integrating coding and noncoding transcriptome profiles, along with clinical, demographic, and genomic data, when determining treatment options. Abstract Purpose: To determine if racial differences in gene and microRNA expression translates to differences in lung tumor biology with clinical relevance in African Americans (AA) and European Americans (EA). Experimental Design: The NCI-Maryland Case Control Study includes seven Baltimore City hospitals and is overrepresented with AA patients (~40%). Patients that underwent curative NSCLC surgery between 1998 and 2014 were enrolled. Comparative molecular profiling used mRNA (n = 22 AAs and n = 19 EAs) and microRNA (n = 42 AAs and n = 55 EAs) expression arrays to track differences in paired fresh frozen normal tissues and lung tumor specimens from AA and EA. Pathway enrichment, predicted drug response, tumor microenvironment infiltration, cancer immunotherapy antigen profiling, and microRNA target enrichment were assessed. Results: AA-enriched differential gene expression was characterized by stem-cell and invasion pathways. Differential gene expression in lung tumors from EA were primarily characterized by cell proliferation pathways. Population-specific gene expression was partly driven by population-specific miRNA expression profiles. Drug susceptibility predictions revealed a strong inverse correlation between AA resistance and EA sensitivity to the same panel of drugs. Statistically significant differences in M1 and M2 macrophage infiltration was observed in AA (P < 0.05), however, PD-L1, PD-L2 expression was similar between both. Conclusions: Comparative transcriptomic profiling revealed clear differences in lung tumor biology between AA and EA. Increased participation by AA in lung cancer clinical trials are needed to integrate, and leverage, transcriptomic differences with other clinical information to maximize therapeutic benefit in both AA and EA. GSEA, Connectivity Map, CIBERSORT, cancer immunotherapy antigen profiling, and hypergeometric testing for overlapping miRNA targets were performed.

DESIGN
We used microarrays to detail differential gene expression in African Americans and European Americans with non-small cell lung cancer. Patient characteristics for the mRNA cohort (n = 22 AAs and n = 19 EAs). The mRNA cohort included 11 matched pairs and 5 unmatched pairs from AA, and 14 matched pairs and 2 unmatched pairs from EA.

