TITLE
Gene expression profiling implicates novel hormonal regulation of the floral initiation process in soybeans

ORGANISM
Glycine max

SUMMARY
The transition to flowering is characterized by a shift of the shoot apical meristem (SAM) from leaf production to the initiation of a floral meristem.  In this study, we addressed the nature of SAM gene networks involved in the early floral initiation process in the crop legume soybean. Unique aspects (such as pod development and nitrogen fixation) of legume development make them appealing for plant development studies. Soybean, a major oilseed crop, possesses varied maturity groups; hence, understanding and unravelling initial transition control has implications in manipulating crop yield. To this end, we performed global gene expression analysis using Affymetrix® soybean GeneChip® with RNA isolated from micro-dissected soybean SAMs at various time points after plants were shifted from long-day to short-day growth conditions. Analysis of the resulting microarray data revealed a total of 331 transcripts that have differential expression profiles. Intriguingly, about 20% of the transcripts affected by the switch in the development program have orthologs reported to be responsive to abscisic acid (ABA), suggesting an increase in ABA levels in the SAM during this developmental change. A subsequent immunoassay verified this, thereby implicating its possible function as an endogenous signal during the floral evocation process. The striking occurrence of abiotic stress-related transcripts, including trehalose metabolism genes, in SAMs during the early transition to floral meristems points to an overlap of abiotic stress and floral signalling pathways in soybean.  In addition, other hormones - auxin, jasmonic acid and brassinosteroids - and a number of candidate protein kinases may also act in the signalling process prior to or concurrently with the induction of the putative floral homeiotic transcripts. This indicates that molecular events mediated by multiple hormonal pathways are part of the mechanism employed by soybean to regulate the floral transition process. Keywords: transcript profiling floral transition soybean shoot apical meristem

