TITLE
Malaria Host Pathogen Interaction Center Experiment 03: Host and parasite gene transcript abundance measures from whole blood for Macaca mulatta infected with Plasmodium coatneyi Hackeri strain from 7 time points over a 101 day study

ORGANISM
Macaca mulatta

SUMMARY
This project is part of the Malaria Host-Pathogen Interaction Center (MaHPIC) - a transdisciplinary malaria systems biology research program supported by an NIH/NIAID contract (# HHSN272201200031C; see ). The MaHPIC generates many data types (e.g., clinical, hematological, parasitological, metabolomics, functional genomics, lipidomics, proteomics, immune response) and mathematical models, to iteratively test and develop hypotheses related to the complex host-parasite dynamics in the course of malaria in non-human primates (NHPs), and metabolomics data via collaborations with investigators conducting clinical studies in malaria endemic countries, with the overarching goal of better understanding human disease, pathogenesis, and immunity. Curation and maintenance of all data and metadata are the responsibility of the MaHPIC. 

DESIGN
Malaria-naive male rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta), approximately four years of age, were inoculated intravenously with salivary gland sporozoites produced and isolated at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention from multiple Anopheles species (An. dirus, An. gambiae, and An. stephensi) and then profiled for clinical, hematological, parasitological, immunological, functional genomic, lipidomic, proteomic, and metabolomic measurements. The experiment was designed for 101 days, and pre- and post-101 day periods to prepare subjects and administer curative treatments respectively. The anti-malarial drug artemether was subcuratively administered to all subjects at the initial peak of infection, one out of the five macaques received four additional subcurative treatments for subsequent recrudescence peaks.  The experimental infection in one subject was ineffective but the macaque was followed-up for the same period of 101 days. The different clinical phases of the infection were clinically determined for each subject.  Blood-stage curative doses of artemether were administered to all subjects at the end of the study.  Capillary blood samples were collected daily for the measurement of CBCs, reticulocytes, and parasitemias. Capillary blood samples were collected every other day to obtain plasma for metabolomic analysis. Venous blood and bone marrow samples were collected at seven time points for functional genomic, proteomic, lipidomic, and immunological analyses. The seven-time point collections were used to generate these results.  This dataset was generated from whole blood samples from 5 individuals collected 7 times over the 101-day experiment. A total of 35 samples were collected. Within the MaHPIC, this project is known as ‘Experiment 03’.  This dataset was produced by Dr. Steven E. Bosinger, Nirav Patel and Greg Tharp at the Emory University Yerkes Genomics Core. To access other publicly available results from E03 and other MaHPIC Experiments, including clinical results (specifics on drugs administered, diet, and veterinary interventions), and other omics, visit .  This page will be updated as datasets are released to the public.  The experimental design and protocols for this study were approved by the Emory University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). These results are a product of a consortium of researchers known as the Malaria Host Pathogen Interaction Center (MaHPIC).  For more information on the MaHPIC, please visit

