TITLE
Expression data from sequential P. aeruginosa cystic fibrosis (CF) isolates

ORGANISM
Pseudomonas aeruginosa

SUMMARY
To provide a more detailed survey of adaptive changes in the physiology of P. aeruginosa (PA) during long-term infection of the cystic fibrosis (CF) lung, we performed a comparative proteome and transcriptome analysis of a set of isogenic sequential non-mutator and mutator isolates from three selected CF patients. Recently, we showed that during CF lung persistence PA mutators converge to a virulence-attenuated phenotype. In this study, we demonstrate that besides virulence-associated traits (VATs) the adaptation process of PA predominantly comprises metabolic pathways. In end-stage mutator strains, transcripts of genes encoding VATs, chemotaxis, degradation of aromatic compounds and several two-component regulatory systems were decreased. In contrast, several transcripts of genes or proteins involved in metabolism of fatty acids, nucleotides, amino acids and the generation of energy were increased. Of particular interest is the increased expression level of genes involved in (i) the anaerobic arginine-deiminase pathway, (ii) the anaerobic respiration such as nitrate-uptake protein OprF, redox-active azurin and cytchrome c551 peroxidase, (iii) the micro-aerobic respiration such as high oxygen-affinity cytochrome oxidase cbb3 (iv) the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA), glyoxylate shunt and anaplerotic carboxylation reactions to oxaloacetate. Strikingly, an increased transcription of the anaerobic regulator gene anr correlates with the up-regulation of ANR-dependent genes. In conclusion, these changes in transcriptome and proteome indicate an adaptive shift towards constitutive expression of genes of metabolic pathways obviously required for growth under micro-aerobic and nutritional conditions of suppurative CF lung tissue. Finally, these results provide us with new targets for antimicrobial agents and biomarkers reflecting adaptation of PA towards progressive CF lung disease. Keywords: in vitro study/interstrain comparison/clinical isolates/early nonmutator vs. late mutator; variable time point of isolation from cf respiratory secretions

