TITLE
Common and differential transcriptional actions of LXRalpha and LXRbeta in murine macrophages

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The LXR proteins, LXRα and LXRβ, are transcription factors that belong to the nuclear receptor superfamily. LXRs are activated by oxysterols and control the transcription of genes involved in the regulation of cholesterol and fatty acid metabolism. They also mediate several aspects of macrophage biology, including inflammatory responses, cell survival in response to infection and phagocytosis of apoptotic cells. LXRs share a high degree of sequence homology and most of their functions are believed to be performed similarly by LXRα and LXRβ. However, the individual, transcriptional roles of each LXR isoform have not been characterized in detail, in part due to the lack of specific experimental tools that can discriminate between LXRα and LXRβ actions. To identify common and differential transcriptional functions of LXR nuclear receptors in macrophages, we developed a cellular model of stable expression of FLAG-tagged LXRα or LXRβ in LXR-null immortalized murine bone marrow-derived macrophages (parental line published  Elife. 2015 Jul 14;4:e08009. doi: 10.7554/eLife.08009). To take a deeper insight into the epigenomic features of LXR nuclear receptors, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to next-generation sequencing (ChIP-seq) to identify genome-wide binding locations of LXRα and LXRβ in the presence of a synthetic agonist (GW3965, 1uM). Additionally, we identified genome-wide DNA locations of acetylation mark on lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27ac), upon LXR agonist (GW3965, 1uM) and antagonist (GW2033, 1uM) treatment. Collectively, these studies will increase our understanding of common and differential genomic actions of LXRα and LXRβ in cultured murine macrophages.

DESIGN
Examination of genome-wide locations of  LXRα and LXRβ in 3xFLAG-LXRα and 3xFLAG-LXRβ expressing cells using FLAG antibody. Also examination of H3K27ac acetylation mark on the same cells in response to pharmacological treatment with agonist versus antagonist.

