TITLE
Comprehensive Analysis of Gene Expression Patterns in Friedreich’s Ataxia Fibroblasts by RNA Sequencing Reveals Altered Levels of Protein Synthesis Factors and Solute Carriers

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease usually caused by large homozygous expansions of GAA repeat sequences in intron 1 of the frataxin (FXN) gene.  FRDA patients have low FXN mRNA and frataxin protein levels when compared with heterozygous carriers or healthy controls.  Presently, there is no effective treatment for FRDA, and biomarkers to measure therapeutic trial outcomes and/or to gauge disease progression are lacking.  Peripheral tissues, including blood cells, buccal cells, and skin fibroblasts, can readily be isolated from FRDA patients and used to define molecular hallmarks of disease pathogenesis.  However, because these tissues are not directly involved in disease pathogenesis, their relevance as models of the molecular aspects of the disease is yet to be decided.  Transcriptome profiling of FRDA skin fibroblasts revealed significantly upregulated expression of genes encoding plasma membrane solute carrier proteins.  Conversely, the expression of genes encoding accessory factors and enzymes involved in cytoplasmic and mitochondrial protein synthesis was consistently decreased in the FRDA cells.  Finally, comparison of genes differentially expressed in FRDA fibroblasts to 3 previously published gene expression signatures defined for FRDA blood cells showed substantial overlap between the independent datasets, including correspondingly deficient expression of antioxidant defense genes.  Together, these results indicate that gene expression profiling of cells derived from peripheral tissues can, in fact, consistently reveal novel molecular pathways of the disease.

DESIGN
We used RNA sequencing to profile the transcriptomes of primary fibroblast cell lines derived from 18 FRDA patients and 17 unaffected control individuals.  

