TITLE
Deciphering the combinatorial influence of diet and the microbiota on experimental colitis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background & Aims: The complex interactions between diet and the microbiota that influence mucosal inflammation and inflammatory bowel disease are poorly understood. Experimental colitis models provide the opportunity to control and systematically perturb diet and the microbiota in parallel to quantify the contributions between multiple dietary ingredients and the microbiota on host physiology and colitis.    Methods: To examine the interplay of diet and the gut microbiota on host health and colitis, we fed over 40 different diets with varied macronutrient sources and concentrations to specific pathogen free or germ free mice either in the context of healthy, unchallenged animals or dextran sodium sulfate colitis model.     Results: Diet influenced physiology in both health and colitis across all models, with the concentration of protein and psyllium fiber having the most profound effects. Increasing dietary protein elevated gut microbial density and worsened DSS colitis severity. Depleting gut microbial density by using germ-free animals or antibiotics negated the effect of a high protein diet. Psyllium fiber influenced host physiology and attenuated colitis severity through microbiota-dependent and microbiota-independent mechanisms. Combinatorial perturbations to dietary protein and psyllium fiber in parallel explain most variation in gut microbial density, intestinal permeability, and DSS colitis severity, and changes in one ingredient can be offset by changes in the other.     Conclusions: Our results demonstrate the importance of examining complex mixtures of nutrients to understand the role of diet in intestinal inflammation.    Keywords: IBD; Diet; Microbiota; Mouse Models; Systems Biology

DESIGN
18 samples were run with 3 mice from each diet. TD.09052/TD.09054 are controls of each other and should be compared and TD.130633 has a unique ingredient, psyllium, that can be compared to TD.09052/TD.09054. Animals with water only tests the effects of diets and Mice given DSS test the effects of diet and inflammation.

