TITLE
Low temperature sweetening of potato tubers

ORGANISM
Solanum tuberosum

SUMMARY
This is a study to characterize gene expression profiles in stored Russet Burbank potato tubers. Tubers were harvested from commercial fields in the central sands region of Wisconsin in the fall of 2006. The tubers were put into storage at 55 degrees F for preconditioning and wound healing. Shortly after the temperature of the storage bin began to decrease, uniform, healthy tubers were selected for use in this microarray analysis. Tubers were at 53.6 degrees F at this time, and pieces of starch-storing tissue were collected for use as the reference sample. Other tubers were moved to temperature-controlled lockers and these were cooled gradually to either 48 or 40 degrees F following industry standard procedures. The expectation was that tubers held at 48 degrees would not have a significant accumulation of glucose and fructose, but that tubers cooled to 40 degrees would undergo low temperature sweetening and accumulate glucose and fructose to a degree that is unsuitable for processing. Three weeks later, when the locker temperatures were 48 degrees F and 41.5 degrees F, tissue samples were collected for RNA analysis. After another three weeks, samples were collected from tubers at 48 degrees F and 40 degrees F. At that time some tubers were moved from the 48 degree locker to the 40 degree locker in order to see if gene expression changes observed as a result of gradual cooling are similar to those that occur following a sudden decrease in temperature. Three weeks later, samples were collected from tubers held at 48 degrees F, tubers held at 40 degrees F, and from the tubers that were moved from 48 to 40 degrees F. At this time another set of tubers was transferred from 48 degrees to 40 degrees. Three weeks later the last samples were harvested from tubers held at 48 degrees F, from tubers held at 48 degrees F and from tubers that were transferred three weeks prior from 48 to 40 degrees. RNA was isolated from tissue extracted from three tubers. Keywords: Reference design

