TITLE
Regulation of the early embryonic RPE (retinal pigment epithelium) transcriptome by the neural retina

ORGANISM
Gallus gallus

SUMMARY
Purpose: The retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) forms the outer blood-retinal barrier. Primary cultures of RPE can model the barrier, but are very sensitive to culture conditions.  We examined how the neural retina regulates the RPE transcriptome in a culture model of embryonic development. Attention focused on the tight junctional genes essential for barrier function. Methods: Chick RPE from embryonic day 7 (E7) or embryonic day 14 (E14) was cultured on filters in a serum free medium. Media conditioned by organ culture of neural retinas was applied to the apical surface of the cultured RPE. Fetal bovine serum (2%) was included in some experiments.  When the transepithelial electrical resistance (TER) reached a plateau, total RNA was isolated to probe the chick genome on Affymetrix microarrays. The expression tight junctional mRNAs was confirmed by real-time PCR and immunoblotting the protein. Results: The TER was slightly increased by serum, but increased 2-3X by retinal conditioned medium.  Serum diminished the effect of retinal conditioned medium.  In basal conditions, 86% of the transcriptome expressed during development in vivo was also expressed in culture. Approximately 5% of the transcriptome expressed in culture was absent in vivo.  E14 retinal conditioned medium affected 15% of the transcriptome in E7 cultures (24% if serum was included), but only 1.9% in E14 cultures (12% with serum). Examination of 610 genes important for RPE function revealed that mRNAs for 17% were regulated by retinal conditioned medium alone in E7 cultures, compared to 6.2% for E14. For tight junctions, retinal conditioned medium had the most affect on members of the claudin family. These results were confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR. Besides regulating mRNA levels, immunoblotting and immunocytochemistry suggested additional mechanisms whereby retinal secretions regulated protein expression and localization. Conclusions: Gene expression in primary cultures of embryonic RPE resembled the native tissue, but expression, and differentiation, is improved when elements of the normal extracellular environment are replicated in culture.  For a small group of proteins, retinal secretions were required to maintain in vivo-like expression in culture.  Albeit insufficient, retinal secretions promoted differentiation of immature RPE and helped maintain the properties of more mature RPE. Keywords: Tissue interactions, retina, retinal pigment epithelium, blood-retinal barrier, tight junctions

