TITLE
A novel class of tRNA-derived small non-coding RNAs in response to myocardial hypertrophy and contribute to intergenerational inheritance

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
tRNA-derived fragments (tRFs) have served as new class of non-coding RNA and played important role in regulating cellular RNA processing and protein translation, which was also proved have function on the intergenerational effects of paternal disease. However, there was no study reported the influence of tRFs on myocardial hypertrophy. In the current study, we explore the hypothesis that tRFs in response to myocardial hypertrophy and contribute to intergenerational inheritance.We used isoproterenol induced myocardial hypertrophy rat model. Small RNA ( < 40 nt) tanscriptome sequencing was used to select differential expressed tRFs. We over-expressed the highest foldchange tRFs on H9c2 cell to check its function in enlarging cardiocytes surface area. We also compared the tRFs expression pattern in F0 sperm and F1 offspring heart between myocardial hypertrophy (Hyp) and control group (Con), as well as evaluated the phynotype of myocardial hypertrophy in F1 offspring. ISO successfully induced a typical cardiac hypertrophy model in our study. Small RNA-seq revealed tRFs were extremely enriched (84%) in Hyp heart. Overexpression tRFs1 and tRFs2 would both enlarge the surface area of cardiac cell and increase hypertrophic markers (ANF, BNP, and β-MHC) expression. tRFs1, tRFs2, tRFs3 and tRFs4 were also significantly high expressed in Hyp F0 sperm and in Hyp F1 offspring heart, but no function of tRFs7, tRFs9 and tRFs10. Compared to Con F1 offspring, Hyp F1 offspring had high expression levels of β-MHC and ANP genes, and increased fibrosis levles and apoptotic cell in heart.We demonstrate that tRFs are involved in regulating the response of myocardial hypertrophy, it might serve as novel epigenetic factor and contribute to intergenerational inheritance of cardiac hypertrophy.

DESIGN
Heart small mRNA profiles  (15-40 nt) of ISO induced myocardial hypertrophy rats and control were generated by deep sequencing, in triplicate, using Illumina Hi-Seq 2000.

