TITLE
Sub1 occupancy in yeast cells in exponential growth condition

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
A genome-wide location analysis by ChIP on chip of the gene occupancy by Sub1 was undertaken to define the gene targets of Sub1 in vivo. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were performed on epitope-tagged Sub1-3HA cross-linked chromatin from exponentially growing cells. Immunopurified DNA and DNA from whole-cell extracts were fluorescently labelled and competitively hybridized to DNA microarrays harbouring ORFs and intergenic regions. The ratio of fluorescence intensities at each site in the microarray provided a measure of the extent of Sub1 binding to a specific genomic locus. Data from three independent experiments were compiled. Many loci were found to be significantly enriched in active growth conditions where Sub1 is not essential for cell viability. Approximately one-fourth of the enriched loci were located within ORF and the others corresponded to intergenic regions and to genes encoding non-translated RNAs. The ACT1, PMA1, PYK1, ADH1 and snoRNA genes previously identified as DNA targets of Sub1 were indeed enriched in our data. Sub1 was also preferentially bound to a subset of Pol II-transcribed genes encoding constituents of the cell wall, the nucleosome and the ribosome. Remarkably, these Pol II genes represented only two-third of the enriched loci. The other ones corresponded to Pol III-transcribed genes present on the arrays or to the intergenic regions and ORFs adjacent to these genes, suggesting the association of Sub1 to all Pol III-transcribed genes in conditions of active growth. The arrays used had a poor coverage of the rDNA gene locus. Nevertheless, we found a significant enrichment of the different loci corresponding to that region suggesting that Sub1 associates at many locations throughout the rDNA gene. Altogether, the results suggested that Sub1 could be a regulator of all three transcription systems. Keywords: ChIP-Chip

