TITLE
Global analysis of metastasis-associated gene expression in the primary cultures from clinical specimens of ccRCC

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Metastatic clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) has a poor prognosis and unpredictable course and there are no molecular markers that reliably predict ccRCC metastasis. In this study, specimens from 84 patients with ccRCC were directly cultured in vitro. The primary cultures from 38 of 94 specimens contained more than 90% tumor cells at 4th passages. After identified by immunostaining, the primary cultures of metastatic- and nonmetastatic ccRCC specimens from the age-, gender-matched patients were subjected to cDNA microrray assays. A total of 842 differentially expressed genes with FDR (false discovery rate) = 4.79% were identified by using SAM (Significance Analysis of Microarray) software. Pathway enrichment and co-occurrence with “cancer”, “metastasis” and “invasion” in the literature annotations enriched the functions of the 842 genes and indicated the reliability of our microarray assays. Novel genes associated with metastasis were selected based on intra-molecular interaction between 205 differentially expressed genes co-occurred with “metastasis” and those not appeared with “metastasis” on Medline, as well as co-expression analysis between 205 differentially expressed genes co-occurred with “metastasis” and those not appeared on Medline in 12 microarray data. FSTL1, AV722783, SLC15A1, DDX17, ORC2L and PKMYT1 were proved to be potential ccRCC metastasis-associated novel genes, based on its expression patterns in the cultures and tumor tissues. Interestingly, the up-regulated genes (CAV1, PKMYT1 and ORC2L) were up-regulated and the down-regulated genes (FSTL1, GSTM3, CYR61, SLC15A1 and AV722783) were down-regulated, in the primary ccRCC specimens as compared with its adjacent normal kidney in 37 patients (determined by semi-quantitative RT-PCR). This study provides potential biomarkers and novel molecular targets for the early diagnosis and treatment of ccRCC metastasis. Keywords: Homo sapiens

