TITLE
Innate immune response of murine nasal-associated lymphoid tissue (NALT) to Streptococcus pyogenes infection.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Streptococcus pyogenes is a major causative agent of tonsillitis or pharyngitis in children, which can lead to more invasive infections and noninfectious sequellae. S. pyogenes can persist in tonsils, while one-third of children treated with antibiotics continue to shed streptococci and have recurrent infections. Mouse nasal-associated lymphoid tissue (NALT) is functionally analogous to human oropharangeal lymphoid tissues. The innate immune responses of naïve cells from a mucosal site to S. pyogenes is not well described; therefore, we infected C57BL/6 mice intranasally with 108 CFU S. pyogenes. Transcriptional responses by NALT after S. pyogenes infection were analyzed by Affymetrix microarray and quantitative RT-PCR.  Wild-type S. pyogenes induces transcription of both type I and IFN-gamma-responsive genes, pro-inflammatory genes, and acute phase response plasma proteins within 24h after infection.   Invasion of NALT and the induction of the interferon response were not dependent on expression of anti-phagocytic M1 protein.  However, infection with an attenuated, less invasive mutant indicated that a robust innate response by NALT is significantly influenced by intra-NALT bacterial load.  Granulocytic populations of NALT, cervical lymph nodes and spleen were discriminated by characteristic surface and intracellular markers.  Intranasal infection induces systemic release of neutrophils and a substantial influx of neutrophils into NALT at 24h, which decline by 48h after infection.  Macrophages do not significantly increase in S. pyogenes-infected NALT.  Intranasal infection of IFN-gamma -/- (GKO) C57BL/6 mice did not lead to systemic dissemination of wild type S. pyogenes, despite reduced expression of IFN-gamma-responsive mRNAs in NALT.   Infected GKO mice had an unregulated influx of neutrophils into NALT compared to immunocompetant mice and mice treated with an anti-IFN-gamma antibody more rapidly cleared S. pyogenes from NALT.  Thus, IFN-gamma-induced responses have a suppressive influence on early clearance of this pathogen from NALT. Keywords: disease state analysis

