TITLE
Coordinate Control of Nrf2 Mediated Genes in the Human Small Airway Epithelium Highly Responsive to Smoking

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NFE2L2, Nrf2) is an oxidant responsive transcription factor known to induce phase 2 detoxifying and antioxidant genes to protect cells from oxidative stress. Cigarette smoke, with its large oxidant content, is a major stressor to the small airway epithelium, the cells of which are vulnerable to oxidant damage and consequent malignant transformation. In this study, we assessed the role of cigarette smoke in activation of Nrf2 in the human small airway epithelium in vivo. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy was used to sample a pure population of small airway epithelium in 38 healthy nonsmokers and 45 healthy smokers, and gene expression was assessed using Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus 2.0 microarrays. Compared to that of  healthy nonsmokers, Nrf2 protein was significantly activated in the small airway epithelium of healthy normal smokers and localized in the nucleus (p < 0.05). Of the human homologs of 201 known murine Nrf2-mediated genes, 13 highly smoking-responsive genes were identified (p < 10-4, all comparisons smokers to nonsmokers). Using a “Nrf2-index” to quantify the extent of expression in the small airway epithelium of these 13 known Nrf2 genes, variability in the level of expression was observed among the 45 healthy smokers, but the variability was coordinately modulated among the 13 genes, an observation confirmed by TaqMan quantitative PCR. This variability in the coordinate level of expression of the 13 Nrf2-mediated genes was independent of the smoking history. Based on these observations, the “Nrf2 index” was used to evaluate whether other genes modulated by smoking in the small airway epithelium were also coordinately up- or down- modulated among the 45 healthy smokers. Two genes, pirin (PIR) and UDP glucuronosyltransferase 1 family polypeptide A4 (UGT1A4), not previously known to be modulated by Nrf2 were identified as being coordinately modulated among the 45 smokers. Both genes contain several functional antioxidant response elements in the promoter region. Using an electrophoretic mobility shift assay, these antioxidant response elements in the promoters of PIR and UGT1A4 responded in vitro to activated Nrf2. These observations are consistent with the concept that Nrf2 plays an important role in regulating cellular defenses against smoking in the highly vulnerable small airway epithelium cell population, and that there is variability among the population in the relative Nrf2 responsiveness to a similar oxidant burden.

