TITLE
NCH_SLK_GBM_Predonisolone

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Animals: Specific pathogen-free male Wistar-Kyoto rats weighing 300 to 350 g (Charles River Japan, Kanagawa, Japan) were used. Experiments were performed according to institutional guidelines. Anti-GBM GN: GBM antigen for the rats was prepared as described previously(1,2). Five albino rabbits were immunized subcutaneously with GBM antigen emulsified with Freund's complete adjuvant (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, MI, USA). A booster was given three times every two weeks using the same antigen. Four days after the final booster, the rabbits were bled from the carotid artery under anesthesia. Anti-GBM sera were heat-decomplemented for 30 min at 56 degrees Celsius and absorbed with freshly harvested rat erythrocytes. Rats were divided into several groups, each of which consisted of 4 to 8 rats. The rats assigned to the GN groups were injected in the dorsal tail vein with 3 ml/kg of anti-GBM serum diluted ten-fold with saline under ether anesthesia. The day of the anti-GBM serum injection was defined as day 0. The rats assigned to the control groups were injected intravenously with the same volume of non-immune rabbit control serum, for comparison with the anti-GBM GN rats. The general condition and body weight of the rats was observed over the course of the experiments. Drug Treatment: Prednisolone (Shionogi Pharmaceutical, Osaka, Japan) was administered orally at 1 mg/kg body weight twice a day from day 14 of anti-GBM serum injection until sacrifice. cDNA microarray analysis: NCH_RAT_SLK array contains about 3000 distinct cDNAs from a normalized rat kidney cDNA library. cDNAs were spotted on the slide glass with MAS coated surface (Matsunami, Osaka, Japan) and irradiate UV for cross-linking. Non-spotted surface was blocked with succinic anhydride. Total RNA was prepared from each renal cortex by a guanidinium isothiocyanate method using ISOGEN reagent (Nippon Gene, Tokyo, Japan), and mRNA was prepared by using Oligotex-dT30 (Takara, Shiga, Japan), according to the manufacturer's instructions. We hybridized labeled target DNAs on the cDNA microarrays with overnight incubation at 65 degrees Celsius. Hybridization images were scanned using a GenePix 4000A scanner (Axon Instruments, Union City, CA), and the signal intensities were quantified with GenePix Pro 3.0 software (Axon Instruments). Data analysis was performed(3,4). In brief, quantified signal intensities were converted by taking logarithms in base two. Using transformed data derived from each pair of competitive hybridization images, we drew scatter diagrams to compare sample signal intensities with those derived from controls, and executed regression analysis. The given residuals explain logarithmic gene expression ratios. Therefore, we selected genes whose average residuals were more than 1 or less than –1, i.e. they represented a two-fold difference in expression level. References 1. Yamada, M., Sasaki, R., Sato, N., Suzuki, M., Tamura, M., Matsushita, T., Kurumatani, H.Amelioration by beraprost sodium, a prostacyclin analogue, of established renal dysfunction in rat glomerulonephritis model. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 449, 167-176 (2002). 2. Krakower, C.A., Nicholes, B.K., Greenspon, S.A. Proteinuria and the fragility of normal and diseased glomerular basement membrane. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 159, 324-334 (1978). 3. Katsuma, S., Shiojima, S., Hirasawa, A., Suzuki, Y., Takagaki, K., Murai, M., Kaminishi, Y., Hada, Y., Koba, M., Muso, E., Miyawaki, S., Ohgi, T., Yano, J., Tsujimoto, G. Genomic analysis of a mouse model of immunoglobulin A nephropathy reveals an enhanced PDGF-EDG5 cascade. Pharmacogenomics J. 1, 211-217 (2001). 4. Dong, G., Loukinova, E., Chen, Z., Gangi, L., Chanturita, T.I., Liu, E.T., Van Waes, C. Molecular profiling of transformed and metastatic murine squamous carcinoma cells by differential display and cDNA microarray reveals altered expression of multiple genes related to growth, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and the NF-kappaB signal pathway. Cancer Res. 61, 4797-4808 (2001). Keywords: repeat sample

