TITLE
Signature gene expression profiles for cytokinesis mutants in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
During cytokinesis in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, contraction of the cytokinetic ring and primary septum synthesis by chitin synthase II (Chs2p) are coupled processes.  Myosin II (Myo1p), is involved in the actomyosin ring formation, required for proper cytokinesis, while Chs2p is responsible for the chitin primary septum formation which is necessary to stabilize the cytokinetic ring during its contraction. Morphological phenotypes of myo1∆ and chs2∆ mutants are therefore similar particularly in that both are unable to complete normal cytokinesis. A comparison between the global mRNA transcription profiles of myo1∆ and chs2∆ strains was conducted using oligonucleotide microarrays to establish if these cytokinesis mutants exhibited similar mRNA expression patterns and signature profiles were later generated from gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). Genetic experiments were conducted to further test predictions based on the GSEA results. As reported previously in myo1∆ strains, a significant number of protein biosynthesis and RNA processing genes that may be attributed to regulation by cell integrity pathway(s) were also down-regulated in the chs2∆ strain. Genes coding for proteins involved in autophagy were coordinately upregulated only in the chs2∆ strain yet an ATG9 genetic knockout that completely blocks autophagy was viable in chs2∆ and myo1∆ genetic backgrounds.. However, the chs2∆ strain was significantly more susceptible to lysis by B-1,3-glucanase than myo1∆ and fks1 control strains. We interpret this result to indicate that these two cytokinesis mutant strains possess different cell wall properties. This interpretation was further supported by the observation that Slt2p hyperphosphorylation was detected in the chs2∆ strain yet expression of SLT2 was not required for cell viability. We conclude that in contrast to myo1∆ strains, chs2∆ strains do not activate the cell integrity pathway.

