TITLE
Characterization of the oxidative stress regulon of Campylobacter jejuni

ORGANISM
Campylobacter jejuni

SUMMARY
Background: During gut colonization, the enteric pathogen C. jejuni has to surmount the toxic effects of reactive oxygen species produced by its own metabolism, by the host immune system and by the intestinal microflora.  Elucidation of C. jejuni oxidative stress defense mechanisms is critical for understanding Campylobacter pathophysiology.    Results: The mechanisms of oxidative stress defenses in Campylobacter jejuni were characterized by transcriptional profiling, genes mutagenesis, and phenotypic analysis. The transcriptome changes, in response to H2O2, cumene hydroperoxide, or menadione exposure, were found to be oxidant specific and revealed the differential expression of genes belonging to a variety of biological pathways, from the classical oxidative stress defense systems, to the heat shock response, DNA repair and metabolism, fatty acid and capsule biosynthesis, and multidrug efflux pumps. To define the peroxide sensing regulator PerR, an isogenic mutant was constructed and its transcriptome profile compared to the wild-type strain. Sixty-six genes were found to belong to the PerR regulon. PerR appear to regulate gene expression both dependently and independently of the presence of iron and/or H2O2. The perR mutant was affected in its motility and attenuated in the chick colonization model.  Mutagenic and phenotypic studies of the superoxide disumutase SodB, the alkyl-hydroxyperoxidase AhpC, and the catalase KatA, revealed their role in oxidative stress defenses and chick gut colonization.   Conclusion: This study reveals the interplay between PerR, the iron metabolism and the oxidative stress defenses and highlights their role in the colonization and/or survival of C. jejuni in the chick cecum. Keywords: Transcriptional response to 3 oxidants (H2O2, menadione and cumene hydroperoxide) and characterization of the perR regulon (comparison of the transciptomes from the wild-type and perR mutant).

