TITLE
Erythropoietin use in kidney transplants

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background and objectives: This report describes an unusual presentation of severe hypertension (HTN) in a subset of pediatric kidney recipients treated with a steroid avoidance pediatric renal transplantation protocol. The HTN was secondary to atypical, reno-vascular abnormalities (RVA) of the transplanted vasculature, temporally associated with erythropoietin (EPO) use. Design, setting, participants, and measurements: To investigate the clinical significance underlying this event, a retrospective clinical study of 100 pediatric renal transplants was undertaken (50 steroid-free and 50 matched steroid-based controls), with peripheral blood transcriptional analysis of four RVA patients and controls. Results: Regardless of a higher observed incidence of anemia (p < 0.001) and greater overall EPO usage in the first post-transplant year in steroid-free patients, the incidence of new-onset HTN at one yr was significantly less in the steroid-free cohort (p = 0.03). Nevertheless, early EPO (first week post-transplant) was significantly associated with the combinatory findings of new-onset HTN (p = 0.03) and RVA (p = 0.007). Molecular mechanisms of RVA injury were investigated further by peripheral blood cDNA microarray gene expression profiling. A panel of 42 transcripts differentiated patients with RVA and HTN from three sets of matched controls, with and without HTN and EPO use, with 100% concordance (p < 0.001). The biological processes governed by these significant genes suggest a role for EPO regulation of growth factor receptor ubiquitination as a putative mechanism for renal vascular injury. Conclusion: This study cautions against the use early post-transplant use of EPO in immunosuppression regimens with steroid minimization/avoidance, which may have an increased incidence of post-transplant anemia. Set of arrays organized by shared biological context, such as organism, tumors types, processes, etc. Disease State: patient with high blood pressure Keywords: Logical Set

