TITLE
Disparate Oxidant-related Gene Expression of Human Small Airway Epithelium Compared to Autologous Alveolar Macrophages

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Disparate Oxidant-related Gene Expression of Human Small Airway Epithelium Compared to Autologous Alveolar Macrophages in Response to the In Vivo Oxidant Stress of Cigarette Smoking The oxidant burden of cigarette smoking induces lung cell dysfunction, and play a significant role in the pathogenesis of lung disease. Two cell populations directly exposed to the oxidants in cigarette smoke are the small airway epithelium and alveolar macrophages. Of these, the epithelium appears to be more vulnerable to smoking, becoming disordered in differentiation, repair and function, while alveolar macrophages become activated, without becoming diseased. In this context, we asked: for the same individuals, what is the baseline trancriptome of oxidant-related genes in small airway epithelium compared to alveolar macrophages and do the responses of the transcriptome of these 2 cell populations differ substantially to inhaled cigarette smoke? To address these questions we used microarray gene expression and TaqMan analysis to assess the gene expression profile of known oxidant-related genes in paired samples recovered by bronchoscopy from small airway epithelium and alveolar macrophages from the same healthy nonsmokers and normal smokers. Of the 155 oxidant-related genes surveyed, 122 (77%) were expressed in both cell populations in nonsmokers. However, of the genes expressed by both cell populations, oxidant related gene expression levels were higher in alveolar macrophages (67 genes, 43%) than small airway epithelium (37 genes, 24%). There were more oxidant-related genes uniquely expressed in the small airway epithelium (17%), than in alveolar macrophages (5%). In healthy smokers, the majority of oxidant-related genes were expressed in both cell populations, but there were marked differences in the numbers of oxidant-related genes that smoking up- or down-regulated. While smoking up-regulated 15 genes (10%) and down-regulated 7 genes (5%) in the small airway epithelium, smoking had far less effect on alveolar macrophages [only 4 (3%) genes up-regulated, and only 1 (0.6%) down-regulated]. Only a small number of smoking responsive oxidant-related genes overlapped between the two cell types (2 up-regulated, and no down-regulated genes). Consistent with this observation, pathway analysis of smoking-responsive genes in the small airway epithelium showed oxidant-related pathways dominated, but in alveolar macrophages immune-response pathways dominated. Thus, the responses of the oxidant-related transcriptome of cells with an identical genome and exposed to the same oxidant stress of cigarette smoking are very different, with responses of oxidant-related genes of alveolar macrophages far more subdued than that of small airway epithelium, consistent with the clinical observation that, while the small airway epithelium is vulnerable, alveolar macrophages are not " diseased " in response to the oxidant stress of cigarette smoking.

