TITLE
Subtractive Hybridization Reveals Novel Genes Associated with D. melanogaster Early Embryogenesis.

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Background: The early stages of D. melanogaster embryogenesis involve cell migration and pattern formation, and lead to the formation of three germ layers (the ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm). These developmental events are controlled by differential gene activity. In the current study we used a suppressive subtractive hybridization (SSH) procedure to identify a group of genes potentially involved in D. melanogaster early embryogenesis and to study the temporal activity of developmentally regulated genes at five different intervals covering 12 stages of embryogenesis. Results: Macroarrays were constructed to confirm induction of expression and determine the temporal profile of isolated subtracted cDNAs during embryo development. We identified a set of 118 genes that significantly increased their expression levels at least at one developmental interval compared with the reference interval. 53.4% of them have a phenotype and/or molecular function reported in the literature, whereas 46.6% are essentially uncharacterized.  Clustering analysis revealed demarcated transcript groups with maximum gene activity at distinct developmental intervals. In situ hybridization assays were carried out on 30 of the transcripts and of these, 19 (63%) proved to have restricted expression patterns. 11 of the uncharacterized genes that exhibited temporal and spatially restricted patterns of expression in developing embryos encode putative secreted and transmembrane proteins. For three of them we validated our protein sequence predictions by expressing their cDNAs in S2R+ cells and analyze the subcellular distribution of recombinant proteins. Conclusions: Our data provides a list of developmentally regulated D. melanogaster genes and their expression profiles during embryogenesis, including novel information on the temporal and spatial expression patterns of several previously uncharacterized genes. In particular, we recovered a significant number of novel genes encoding putative secreted and transmembrane proteins, suggesting new components of signalling pathways that might be incorporated within the existing regulatory networks controlling Drosophila embryogenesis; they are also good candidates for more functional targeted analyses. Keywords: Drosophila melanogaster, gastrulation, macroarray, developmental time course

DESIGN
We generated a subtracted stage specific cDNA library representing genes differentially expressed between Drosophila melanogaster synciyial blastoderm and gastrula stages. Clones were spotted onto nylon membranes and hybridized against cDNA probes representing mRNA from embryos at five different developmental intervals, in order to obtain time course expression data covering the first 12 stages of Drosophila development. We designed macroarrays containing either 302 non-redundant cDNAs, including protein-coding sequences, ncRNA, transposons, introns and intergenic regions (membranes A, B and C) and the complete subtracted library (579 cDNAs, membrane D). Each clone was spotted in duplicate. The following controls were spotted onto membranes: (1) a fragment of the vector pBluescript II obtained by amplification with the T7 and SP6 universal primers; (2) several spots of DMSO 50% (solvent used); (3) PCR amplified fragment of genes serendipity α, twist, tinman, fog and snail as positive controls, and (4) actin, tubulin, and RP49 as housekeeping, and (5) four dilutions of a PCR amplified fragment from a B. subtilis dap cDNA (ATCC; number 87486), which hybridizes to an in vitro synthesized poly(A)-RNA that was added to the embryo RNA samples (dilution 1/200) prior to the labelling process and used as spike mRNA (Kane et al., 2000).

