TITLE
DNA microarray comparison of gene expression patterns in Paracoccidioides brasiliensis mycelia and yeasts in vitro.

ORGANISM
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis

SUMMARY
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis is a thermally dimorphic fungus, which causes the most prevalent systemic mycosis in Latin America.  Infection is initiated by inhalation of conidia or mycelial fragments by the host, followed by further differentiation into the yeast form.  Information regarding gene expression by either form has been rarely addressed with respect to multiple time points of growth in culture.  Here, we report on the construction of a genomic DNA microarray, covering approximately 25% of the organism’s genome, and its utilization in identifying genes and gene expression patterns during growth in vitro.  Cloned, amplified inserts from randomly sheared gDNA and known control genes were printed onto glass slides to generate a microarray of over 12,000 elements.  To examine gene expression, mRNA was extracted and amplified from mycelial or yeast cultures grown in semi-defined medium for 5, 8 and 14 days.  Principal components analysis and hierarchical clustering indicated that yeast gene expression profiles differed greatly from mycelia, especially at earlier time-points, and that mycelial gene expression changed less than it did on yeasts over time.  Genes, upregulated in yeasts, were found to be involved in methionine/cysteine metabolism, respiratory processes, metabolic processes (sugars, amino acids, proteins and lipids), transporters (small peptides, sugar, ions and toxin), regulatory proteins and transcription factors.  Mycelia genes involved in processes such as cell division, protein catabolism, nucleotide biosynthesis and toxin and sugar transporters showed differential expression.  Sequenced clones were compared with Histoplasma capsulatum and Coccidioides posadasii genome sequences to assess potentially common pathways across species, such as sulfur and lipid metabolism, amino acid transporters, transcription factors and genes possibly related to virulence.  We also analyzed gene expression with time in culture and found that while transposable elements and components of respiratory pathways tended to increase in expression with time, genes coding for ribosomal structural proteins and protein catabolism tended to sharply decrease in expression over time, particularly in yeast.  These findings expand knowledge about the different morphologic forms of P. brasiliensis during growth in culture.

