TITLE
Genome Variation in the Symbiotic Nitrogen-Fixing Bacterium Sinorhizobium meliloti

ORGANISM
Sinorhizobium meliloti 1021

SUMMARY
Differences in genome size and gene content are among the most important signatures of microbial adaptation and genome evolution. Here, we investigated the patterns of genome variation among strains of the symbiotic nitrogen-fixing bacterium Sinorhizobium meliloti. Using the sequenced strain Rm1021 as a reference, the genome size and gene content variations were analyzed among ten diverse natural strains, through pulse field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and whole-genome microarray hybridizations. Our PFGE analysis showed a genome size range of 6.45-7.01Mbp, with the greatest variation arising from the pSymA replicon, followed by that of pSymB. No observable size difference was evident among the chromosomes. Consistent with this pattern of size differences, 41.2% of ORFs on pSymA were variably absent/present, followed by 12.7% on pSymB, and 3.7% on the chromosome. However, the percentages of ORFs that were variably duplicated were more evenly distributed among the three replicons, 11.0%, 16.5% and 15.3% respectively for ORFs on pSymA, pSymB and the chromosome. Among the 10 strains, the percentages of absent ORFs ranged from 1.51% to 6.35% and those of duplicated ORFs ranged from 0.27% to 8.56%. Our analyses showed that host plants, geographic origins, multilocus enzyme electrophoretic types, and replicon sizes had little influence on the distribution patterns of absent or duplicated ORFs. The proportions of ORFs that were either variably absent/present or variably duplicated differed greatly among the functional categories, for each of the three replicons as well as for the whole genome. Interestingly, we observed positive correlations among the three replicons in their numbers of absent ORFs as well as the numbers of duplicated ORFs, consistent with coordinated gene gains/losses in this important bacterium in nature. microarray:Sm6kOligo

