TITLE
Comparison of gene expression in whole blood of mice subjected to hypobaric hypoxia at Mt. Everest in vivo.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
To determine hypoxia mediated changes in whole blood, normal swiss webster mice were gradually exposed to a chronic hypobaric hypoxic environment up to 8500m, for 2 weeks in vivo. Control, age-matched mice were maintained under normoxic conditions in Kathmandu (c. 1300 mts above sea level).

DESIGN
Purpose: To examine and characterize the expression profile of genes expressed at hypobaric hypoxia on Mt. Everest of whole blood in comparison to the control. Methods: At the beginning of the experiment mice were divided into two groups, control (room condition, Kathmandu, Nepal) and hypoxic (hypoxic condition). For conditioning, the hypoxic group was exposed to lower levels of hypobaric hypoxia during our mountaineering expedition to Mt Everest. The oxygen level was decreased according to our climbing protocol from 21% to about 7% over a period of 15 days. Food and water were changed daily during the course of the experiment. After 15 days animals were euthanized after whole blood extraction from V. Cava for further analysis. RNA from whole blood was isolated, processed and used for microarray-based expression profiling. Profiles were generated for genes differentially expressed at control versus hypobaric hypoxia in whole blood using a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0%.We validated the profiles by real-time quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Results: The regional transcriptomes associated with hypobaric hypoxia on Mt. Everest in whole blood were identified. We found 947 genes that were differentially expressed in normobaric hypoxic whole blood compared to control with a 0% FDR and a 2 fold cutoff. Conclusion: Transcriptome level differences exist between control and hypobaric hypoxia in whole blood. Our definition of the synaptic transcriptome provides insight into the functioning of the unique response to hypoxia in whole blood.

