TITLE
The response of Mycobacterium tuberculosis to reactive oxygen and nitrogen species

ORGANISM
Mycobacterium tuberculosis

SUMMARY
The bacteriostatic and bactericidal effects and the corresponding expression profiles of Mycobacterium tuberculosis to representative oxidative and nitrosative stresses were investigated by growth and survival studies and whole genome expression analysis.  The response of M. tuberculosis to a range of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) concentrations tended to fall into three distinct categories: (1) low level exposure resulted in induction of few H2O2 sensitive genes, (2) intermediate exposure resulted in massive transcriptional changes without an effect on growth or survival, and (3) high exposure resulted in a muted transcriptional response and eventual death. Nitric oxide (NO) exposure initiated much of the same transcriptional response as H2O2. However, unlike H2O2 exposure, NO exposure affected a dose-dependent bacteriostatic activity without killing and induction of dormancy-related genes. Included in the shared response to H2O2 and NO was the induction of genes encoding oxidative stress detoxification and iron-sulfur cluster repair functions. Expression of several key oxidative stress defense genes was constitutive, or increased moderately from an already elevated level, suggesting bacilli that are continually primed for oxidative stress defense. Deletion of the known oxidative stress responsive regulator, FurA, resulted in the constitutive expression of furA, katG, and Rv1907c; while other genes do not appear to be solely controlled by FurA. In contrast to Escherichia coli, M. tuberculosis appears highly resistant to DNA damage-dependent killing caused by low mill molar levels of H2O2. Furthermore, instead of limiting access to iron to prevent hydroxyl radical formation from H2O2 and thus DNA damage, M. tuberculosis induced iron uptake genes in response to H2O2 and NO.

DESIGN
Set of arrays that are part of repeated experiments Compound Based Treatment: H2O2 or DETA/NO treatment

