TITLE
Identifying mutant genes in the LNCaP and 22Rv1 prostate cancer cell lines

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
We used a modification of GINI analysis to identify genes containing premature translation termination codons (PTC) generated by nonsense or frameshift mutations in prostate cancer cell lines. The analysis was performed in two steps. In the first step nonsense mediated mRNA decay (NMD) was inhibited in prostate cancer cell lines using incubation with medium containing caffeine for 4 hours. Gene expression analysis of caffeine treated or untreated cells after  this step detects mRNA accumulation  that takes place for genes containing PTC and as well as for genes that show induction of transciption due to stress caused by NMD inhibition. In the second step either both  transcription and NMD or transcription only are blocked  by incubating cell in a medium containing either both actinomycin D and caffeine or actinomacin D only for 4 hours. Gene expression analysis after this second step detects mRNA degradation for genes containing PTC as well as for genes that show induction of transciption due to stress caused by NMD inhibition. The efficiency of mRNA degradation for genes containing PTC during this step depends on whether NMD is inhibited or not. The efficiency of mRNA degradation for stress response genes does not depend on whether NMD is inhibited or not. Our modified GINI protocol allows efficient separation of genes containing PTC from the genes that show mRNA increases due to stress response to NMD inhibition.

DESIGN
The LNCaP and 22Rv1 cells were seeded into four  60 mm tissue culture plates each.  Caffeine (10 mM) was added to three plates and one plate was incubated without caffeine as a control. Following four hours? incubation, the medium was removed from one plate (with caffeine) and from the control plate and total RNA was prepared using TRIZOL reagent, according to manufacturer?s instructions, and used for an Affymetrix U133Plus2.0 oligonucleotide array hybridization. The caffeine-containing medium of the two remaining plates was removed, the cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline and the medium with actinomycin D (2  mkg/ml) together with caffeine (10 mM) was added to one plate.  Actinomycin D alone was added to the other plate. Following another four hours? incubation, the total RNA from both plates was prepared and used for an Affymetrix U133Plus2.0 oligonucleotide array analysis.

