TITLE
Early Dysregulation of Cell Adhesion and Extracellular Matrix Pathways in Breast Cancer Progression

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Proliferative breast lesions, such as simple ductal hyperplasia (SH) and atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH), are candidate precursors to ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and invasive cancer. To better understand their relationship to more advanced disease, we used microdissection and DNA microarrays to profile the gene expression of patient-matched histologically normal (HN), ADH, and DCIS from 12 patients with ER+ sporadic breast cancer. SH were profiled from a subset of cases. We found 837 differentially expressed genes between DCIS-HN and 447 between ADH-HN, with > 90% of the ADH-HN genes also present among the DCIS-HN genes. Only 61 genes were identified between ADH-DCIS. Expression differences were reproduced in an independent cohort of patient-matched lesions by qRT-PCR. Many breast cancer-related genes and pathways were dysregulated in ADH and maintained in DCIS. Particularly, cell adhesion and extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions were overrepresented. Focal adhesion was the top pathway in each gene set. We conclude that ADH and DCIS share highly similar gene expression and are distinct from HN. In contrast, SH appear more similar to HN. These data provide genetic evidence that ADH (but not SH) are often precursors to cancer and suggest cancer-related genetic changes, particularly adhesion and ECM pathways, are dysregulated prior to invasion and even before malignancy is apparent. These findings could lead to novel risk stratification, prevention, and treatment approaches. Patient-matched (HN, SH, ADH, DCIS) samples were isolated from within patients with ER+ sporadic breast cancers via laser capture microdissection.  Use of patient-matched samples decreases between patient variations.

DESIGN
Forty total samples were analyzed via Affymetrix U133A. Patient age ranged from 48-92. Case numbers correspond to individual patients. Each sample is identified by case number, histologic lesion and corresponding microarray ID.

