TITLE
Protein translation as major target for gene expression control of O. tsutsugamushi

ORGANISM
Orientia tsutsugamushi

SUMMARY
Orientia tsutsugamushi, an obligate intracellular bacterium, is the causative agent of Scrub typhus. The bacterium can replicate both in its arthropod host and in mammals, including humans. The control mechanisms for bacterial gene expression within eukaryotic host cells are largely unknown. Previously, we reported that the O. tsutsugamushi genome has the highest repeat density of any sequenced bacterial genome due to the extraordinary proliferation of mobile genetic elements (MGEs), suggesting a unique genomic evolution in intracellular niches. In this study, the global gene expression of O. tsutsugamushi within eukaryotic cells was examined using a microarray and proteomic approaches. These approaches identified 643 genes, corresponding to approximately 30% of genes encoded in the genome. The majority of expressed genes belonged to several functional categories including protein translation, protein processing/secretion, and replication/repair. We also searched the conserved sequence blocks (CSBs) in the genomes of different O. tsutsugamushi strains to identify gene blocks impermeable to proliferating MGEs. Although extensive shuffling of genomic sequences was observed between two different strains, 204 CSBs with sizes ranging from 1 kbp to 29 kbp, covering 48% of the genome, were identified. When combining the data of the CSBs and global gene expression, CSBs in the O. tsutsugamushi genomes correlates well with the location of expressed genes, especially in protein level, suggesting the functional conservation between gene expression and genomic location. Finally, we compared global gene expression of the bacteria infecting fibroblasts and macrophages using microarray analysis. Major changes in the expression of genes with known functions were the downregulation of genes involved in translation, protein processing and secretion, which resulted in significant reduction in bacterial translation rates and growth within macrophages. These results suggest that the replication of O. tsutsgamushi is controlled primarily by the expression of genes involved in bacterial translation and subsequent protein processing/secretion.

