TITLE
Study of Differential Gene Expression in Metastatic Breast Tumors

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Introduction: The prognosis for patients with breast tumor metastases to brain is extremely poor. Identification of prognostic molecular markers of the metastatic process is critical for designing therapeutic modalities for reducing the occurrence of metastasis. Although ubiquitously present in most human organs, calcium-activated potassium (BK) channel is significantly upregulated in breast cancer cells. In this study we investigated the role of KCNMA1 gene, which encodes α subunit of KCa channels (BK channels) in breast cancer metastasis and invasion.   Methods: We performed Global exon array to study the expression of KCNMA1 in metastatic breast cancer in brain, compared its expression in primary breast cancer and breast cancers metastatic to other organs, and validated the findings by RT-PCR.   Immunohistochemistry was performed to study the expression and localization of α subunit of KCa channel protein in primary and metastatic breast cancer tissues and breast cancer cell lines. We performed matrigel invasion, transendothelial migration and membrane potential assays in established lines of  normal breast cells (MCF-10A), non-metastatic breast cancer (MCF-7), non-brain metastatic breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231), and brain-specific metastatic breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-361) to study whether KCa channel inhibition attenuates breast tumor invasion and metastasis using KCNMA1 knockdown with siRNA and biochemical inhibition with IBTX (Iberiotoxin).  Results: The Global exon array and RT-PCR showed higher KCNMA1 expression in metastatic breast cancer in brain compared to metastatic breast cancers in other organs. Our results clearly show that metastatic breast cancer cells exhibit increased BK channel activity, leading to greater invasiveness and transendothelial migration, both of which could be attenuated by blocking KCNMA1.  Conclusion: Determining the relative abundance of BK channel over expression in breast cancer metastatic to brain and the mechanism of its action in brain metastasis will provide a unique opportunity to identify and differentiate between low grade breast tumors that are at high risk for metastasis from those at low risk for metastasis. This distinction would in turn allow for the appropriate and efficient application of  effective  treatments while sparing patients  with low risk for metastasis from the toxic side effects of chemotherapy.

DESIGN
Three cell lines representing primary breast tumor (MCF-7), metastatic breast tumors to other organs excluding brain (MDA-MB-231), and metastatic breast tumors to brain (MDA-MB 361) were run in triplicates to identify differentially expressed genes. Metastatic breast tumor cell lines were compared with primary breast tumor cell line with respect to their gene expression.

