TITLE
Characterization of the transcriptional heterogeneity present within the rat lymphatic and blood vasculatures

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
The goal and objective of this study was to identify the transcriptional profiles differentiating the artery, vein, and lymphatic lineages in the adult rat vasculature with particular emphasis on the unique elements of the collecting lymphatic vessel transcriptome. A 2 x 3 experimental design was utilized in which parallel arteries, veins, and lymphatics from two different tissue beds were examined. The rat thoracic duct was selected as a large, post-nodal collecting lymphatic vessel that exhibits excellent conduit-type behavior while the rat mesenteric lymphatic was selected as a smaller, pre-nodal collecting lymphatic vessel that exhibits excellent pump behavior (see Gashev AA, et al. Microcirculation. 2004 Sep;11(6):477-92. [PMID: 15371129]). The axillary artery and vein were selected for comparison to the thoracic duct due to their similar anatomical position distal to the common junction of the lymphatic and venous vascular trees and represent a large artery and large vein, respectively. The mesentery artery and vein were selected for comparison to the mesenteric lymphatic vessels due to their parallel position within the mesenteric vasculature and represent a small atery and small vein, respectively.

DESIGN
A 2 x 3, reference-based, experimental design was utilized consisting of both large (thoracic) and small (mesenteric) arteries, veins, and collecting lymphatic vessels for a total of 6 sample groups with n=6 biological replicates present in each group. All vessels acquired from the same donor animal have the same numerical label and were handled in parallel through all experimental steps. Each vessel sample RNA sample was amplified, labeled with Cy5, and compared to the same Rat Universal Reference RNA sample (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) that was amplified and labeled with Cy3 dye. No dye swaps were utilized.

