TITLE
Gene expression microarray analysis of heat stress in the soil invertebrate Folsomia candida

ORGANISM
Folsomia candida

SUMMARY
Temperature is an important ecological condition, and sudden temperature changes in soil can induce stress in soil-dwelling invertebrates. Soil animals can move to more favorable habitats and/or adapt physiologically to a stressful environment. Hyperthermic conditions will impact gene expression as one of the first steps. We use a transcriptomics approach to identify the transcripts of which expression changed in response to heat stress in the springtail Folsomia candida using a 5,131 probe microarray. A temperature shift from 20°C to 30°C for 30 minutes significantly altered the expression of 142 genes, of which 116 were upregulated, and 26 downregulated. Many upregulated genes encoded heat shock proteins (Hsps) or enzymes involved in the synthesis of ATP, such as members of the electron transport chain. Furthermore, genes involved in oxidative stress and anion-transporting ATPases were upregulated. Downregulated were glycoside hydrolases, involved in catalysis of certain disaccharides, which indicate an accumulation of stress-protective disaccharides. The microarray results from this study, which were validated using quantitative RT PCR, reveal a mild response to heat shock in this soil invertebrate, relative to other organisms. This may be due to specific ecological factors during evolution of soil invertebrates, such as the relatively stable temperatures in the soil habitat. This study presents potential candidate genes for future functional studies concerning thermal stress in soil-dwelling invertebrates, like e.g., the investigation of the heat hardening process.

DESIGN
Folsomia candida was first acclimated to LUFA 2.2 soil at 20 C for two days. Then animals were either exposed to 30 C for 30 minutes (heat shock treated), or were not heat shocked (reference). For each treatment 4 biological replicates were used, replicate samples consisted of total RNA extracted from ~30 animals exposed in the same jar to either reference or heat shock. Each unique heat shock treated sample was hybridized to a unique reference sample. In total in 4 hybridizations of 8 samples, was performed. The dyes were evenly distributed, which means that for each treatment two samples were labeled with cy3 and the other two with cy5.

