TITLE
MicroRNA expression analysis in Uveal melanoma from formalin fixed paraffin embedded sections

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
miRNA expression analysis was done on Uveal melanoma, metastatic and non - metastatic case in formalin fixed paraffin embedded sections, identified from case registry and confirmed by Chromosome insitu hybridization harboring monosomy 3 aberration in metastaic case and no aberration in non metastatic case. 19 miRNAs were found to be expressed only in class I tumors (choroidal melanoma) and not in class II (liver metastasis) and 11 miRNAs were found to be expressed only in class II and not in class I. The tumors were found to harbor oncomirs in both choroidal melanoma and metastasizing melanoma targeting tumor suppressor genes and metastatic suppressor genes. None of the differentially expressed miRNAs in either case were found to be located on the chromosomes which have been proved to carry chromosomal abnormalities. Rather it was found that genes targeted by the miRNAs were found to be present in chromosomal regions that are often found to be deleted 8p22, 13q and 17p.

DESIGN
Organism used: Homo sapiens. * Slides: Human miRNA V2 8x15k Arrays AMADID: 19118. * Starting material: 18 slides with formalin fixed Paraffin embedded sections-20 μm. * RNA Samples used: 225-94-DUP, 225-94-E, 727-07-DUP, 727-07 -E. * Labeling kit: Agilent miRNA labeling reagent and Hybridization Kit. * Labeling Method: Ligation of one cyanine3-pCp molecule to the 3' end of RNA molecule with greater than 90% efficiency that generates fluorescent miRNA. * Total RNA and cRNA Purification Kit: Biorad MicroBio Spin 6 columns. * Hybridization Kit: Agilent miRNA Hybridization kit. Hybridization protocol See Agilent Technologies website for miRNA microarray hybridization and wash protocol: Scan protocol Laser detection of Cyanine 3 and Cyanine 5 fluorescence is performed using a confocal scanning instrument containing two tuned lasers, which excite Cyanine dyes at the appropriate wavelengths. Description Microarrays were scanned on an Agilent scanner (G2505C) at 100% PMT with 10% for lower intensity (XDR Scanning).Data extraction was carried out with Agilent Feature Extraction software (version 9.1), and normalization was done using linear per array algorithm according to the manufacturer’s protocol Data processing Feature extracted data was analyzed using GeneSpring GX v 10.0.2 software from Agilent. Normalization of the data was done in GeneSpring GX using the recommended Percentile shift normalization (50th percentile) . Further quality control of normalized data was done using correlation based condition tree to eliminate bad experiments. High expressed miRNA's were clustered using gene tree to identify significant gene expression patterns.

