TITLE
Comparative analysis of gene regulation by the transcription factor PPARα_human

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Studies in mice have shown that PPARα is an important regulator of hepatic lipid metabolism and the acute phase response. However, little information is available on the role of PPARα in human liver. Here we set out to compare the function of PPARα in mouse and human hepatocytes via analysis of target gene regulation. Primary hepatocytes from 6 human and 6 mouse donors were treated with PPARα agonist Wy14643 and gene expression profiling was performed using Affymetrix GeneChips followed by a systems biology analysis. Baseline PPARα expression was similar in human and mouse hepatocytes. Depending on  species and time of exposure, Wy14643 significantly induced the expression of 362-672 genes. Surprisingly minor overlap was observed between the Wy14643-regulated genes from mouse and human, although more substantial overlap was observed at the pathway level. Xenobiotics metabolism and apolipoprotein synthesis were specifically regulated by PPARα in human hepatocytes, whereas glycolysis-gluconeogenesis was regulated specifically in mouse hepatocytes. Most of the genes commonly regulated in mouse and human were involved in lipid metabolism and many represented known PPARα targets, including CPT1A, HMGCS2, FABP, ACSL, and ADFP. Several genes were identified that were specifically induced by PPARα in human (MBL2, ALAS1, CYP1A1, TSKU) or mouse (Fbp2, lgals4, Cd36, Ucp2, Pxmp4). Furthermore, several putative novel PPARα targets were identified that were commonly regulated in both species, including CREB3L3, KLF10, KLF11 and MAP3K8. Our results suggest that PPARα activation has a major impact on gene regulation in human hepatocytes. Importantly, the role of PPARα as master regulator of hepatic lipid metabolism is generally well-conserved between mouse and human. Overall, however, PPARα regulates a mostly divergent set of genes in mouse and human hepatocytes. Keywords: Analysis of target gene regulation by using microarrays

DESIGN
Primary hepatocytes from 6 human subjects were treated with the PPARα agonist Wy14643 for 6 and 24 hours, and gene expression profiling was performed using Affymetrix GeneChips.  Human hepatocytes and Hepatocyte Culture Medium Bulletkit were purchased from Lonza Bioscience (Verviers, Belgium). Primary hepatocytes were isolated from surgical liver biopsies obtained from six individual donors who underwent surgery after informed consent was obtained for surgery with subsequent use of samples in experiments. Hepatocytes were isolated with two-step collagenase perfusion method and the viability of the cells was over 80%.  Cells were plated on collagen-coated six-well plates and filled with maintenance medium. Upon arrival of the cells, the medium was discarded and was replaced by Hepatocyte Culture Medium (HCM) with additives. The additives included Gentamicin sulphate/Amphotercin-B, Bovine serum albumin (Fatty acid free), Transferrin, Ascorbic acid, Insulin, Epidermal growth factor, Hydrocortisone hemisuccinate.  The next day, cells were incubated in fresh medium in the presence or absence of Wy14643 (50 microM) dissolved in DMSO for 6 and 24 hours, followed by RNA isolation.

