TITLE
Analysis of the Haloferax volcanii Transcriptome

ORGANISM
Haloferax volcanii DS2

SUMMARY
In this study the transcriptome of Haloferax volcanii DS70 (Wendoloski D, Ferrer C, Dyall-Smith ML. Microbiology. 2001, 147: 959-64), grown under of a variety of conditions, was mapped using a custom genome-wide tiled array consisting of 25 nt probes spaced in 35 nt windows. H. volcanii is a facultative aerobe capable of growth on simple carbon and nitrogen sources, it is amenable to genetic manipulations and has become a widely used model organism for studies on haloarchaeal physiology and global gene regulation.  Of particular interest is the identification of genes encoding enzymes needed for growth on simple carbon and nitrogen sources and how these cells respond to limitations in these key nutrients.  To address these questions we have compared the RNA populations of cells undergoing balanced growth in completely defined minimal medium (CDM) with succinate-glycerol, pyruvate or lactate as sole carbon sources with RNA from cells grown in complex rich medium (CX) containing yeast extract and tryptone.   Data from these studies have identified a core group of genes expressing during balanced growth in either condition as well as specific genes associated with the biosynthesis of amino acids, nucleotides and other key building blocks.  The response to nutrient limitation was also investigated.  RNA populations from cells entering stationary phase from growth in CDM and CX media were compared to those undergoing balanced growth, and these RNAs were also compared with RNA populations of cells subjected to nitrogen or carbon starvation.  Growth in the presence of histidine as the sole source of nitrogen in CDM medium also presented a model for growth with a “poor” nitrogen source.  The results of these studies identified specific subpopulations of genes associated with nitrogen limitation and general nutrient limitation associated with the transition to stationary phase.   Many of the responsive protein encoding genes were assigned general functions based on their similarity to known proteins; however, in each comparison, approximately half of the affected genes encode proteins classified as unknown or hypothetical proteins. The haloarchaea are also distinct among the Archaea in having multiple genes encoding the general transcription factor proteins TATA binding protein (TBP) and transcription factor IIB (TFB).  We observed differential expression of these genes, providing further support for the proposal that alternative TBP-TFB pairings are associated with programmed changes in gene expression in the haloarchaea.

