TITLE
Hoxd genes and fiber type-specific markers specify adult mouse muscle type in a diet-independent way

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Introduction: The mouse skeletal muscle is composed of four distinct fiber types that differ in contractile function, number of mitochondria and metabolism. Every muscle group has a specific composition and distribution of the four fiber types. Until now, three genes (CnA, PGC1α and PPARδ) are identified that are involved in the generation of more oxidative muscle types. In the present study we searched for novel genes that are involved in specifying different muscle types. Methods: Gastrocnemius and quadriceps muscles were dissected from 20-week old C57BL/6J mice. Gene expression profiles were compared at the level of the whole-transcriptome. The diet-sensitivity of genes differentially expressed between muscle types was explored by comparing mice fed a low fat diet with mice fed a high fat diet. Results: We identified 162 differentially expressed genes in the gastrocnemius as compared with the quadriceps. Genes with the strongest regulations were markers for oxidative fiber types, Hoxd8, Hoxd9 and Hoxd10 and others involved in embryogenesis. Additionally, diet did not influence the expression levels of genes specifying muscle types. Finally, when extrapolating our data to the soleus we could not find a corresponding gene expression pattern between Hoxd8, Hoxd9 and any of the fiber-type specific markers. However, based on these gene expression patterns we could distinguish the gastrocnemius, quadriceps and soleus from each other. Conclusion: Hoxd genes and genes that are markers for the different fiber types specify muscle type in a diet-independent way

DESIGN
The  aim of the present study was to find novel genes that may play a role in specifying muscle types. Therefore we compared gene expression profiles of the gastrocnemius with the quadriceps at the level of the whole-transcriptome. Functional implications were assessed by the analyses of predefined gene sets based on Gene Ontology, biochemical, metabolic and signaling pathways. muscle-type comparison

