TITLE
Transcriptomic analysis reveals cold responsive genes implicated in peach low temperature tolerance

ORGANISM
Prunus persica

SUMMARY
A transcriptome analysis was applied on two peach (Prunus persica L.) cultivars with different sensitivity to low temperature regimes to identify cold-responsive genes that might be involved in tolerance to long low temperature storage. Peach fruit from ‘Morettini No2’ and ‘Royal Glory’, a sensitive and a tolerant, to chilling injury cultivars, respectively, were harvested at commercial maturity stage and allowed to ripen at room temperature (25°C) or subjected to 4 and 6-weeks of cold storage (0°C, 95% R.H.) followed by ripening at room temperature. Microarray experiments, employing the peach microarray platform (μ PEACH 1.0), were carried out by comparing harvested fruit against 4- and 6-week cold-stored fruit. The analysis identified 173 and 313 genes that were differentially expressed in ‘Morettini No2’ and ‘Royal Glory’ fruit after 4 weeks, respectively. However, the 6 weeks cold storage provoked a decrease in the total number of genes differentially expressed in both cultivars. RNA blot analysis validated the differential expression of certain genes showed in microarray data. Among these genes, two heat shock proteins (hsps), a putative β-D-xylosidase, an expansin, a dehydrin and a pathogenesis-related protein PR-4B precursor were induced during cold storage in both cultivars. The induction of hsps and the putative β-D-xylosidase appeared to be independent on the duration of postharvest treatment. On the other hand, transcript levels of lipoxygenase were quite constant during postharvest ripening, while a strong reduction or disappearance was observed after cold storage. A dehydration-induced RD22-like protein showed a reduction in the accumulation of transcripts during postharvest ripening independently on the temperature conditions. Overall, the current study shed some light on the molecular aspects of cold stress in peach fruit quality and identified some ripening and/or cold-induced genes which function need further elucidation.

DESIGN
A direct comparison approach has been used to investigate the effect at the transcriptional level of 4 (4w) or 6 (6w) weeks of cold storage  (0°C, 95% R.H.) plus 1 day at room temperaure on ripe peaches  (Prunus persica cv Morettini N°2 and Royal Glory). RNA has been extracted from either cold stored fruit and from fruit  at harvest   plus 1 day at room temperature (control). At least four hybridization have been conducted for a total of four technical replicates (with dye-swap).

