TITLE
Temporal analysis of  P15 hippocampus in kainate-induced seizures. Koh-2K08NS002068-04

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Early childhood convulsions have been correlated with hippocampal neuron loss in patients with intractable temporal lobe epilepsy. Using  a " two-hit " rat seizure model, we have shown that animals subjected to kainate (KA)- or hypoxia-induced seizures during early postnatal period showed no cell death, yet sustained more extensive neuronal death after second seizures in adulthood. An early life seizure, without causing overt cellular injury, predisposes the brain to the damaging effect of seizures in later life. Cellular and molecular changes that accompany early seizures and that lead to subsequent epileptogenesis and increased susceptibility to seizure-induced neuronal injury, however, remain poorly understood. We propose to investigate age-specific, time-dependent changes in gene expression that may underlie this priming effect of early-life seizures. We will determine the sequence of gene expression pattern in the hippocampus at various times following KA induced seizures at postnatal day (P) 15. Previous studies have shown that AMPA receptor subtype of glutamate receptors play a crucial role in the age-specific vulnerability and in the long-term epileptogenic effects of perinatal hypoxia seizures. We found that AMPA receptor antagonists block the increased susceptibility caused by early life seizures to later seizures and seizure-induced brain damage.  We hypothesize that an alteration of AMPA receptor composition is one of many changes caused by early-life seizures that leads to an increase in Ca2+ permeability, which then results in cascade of downstream events and modifies array of gene expression that promote epileptogenesis and susceptibility to neuronal death in later life. We will examine three time points: 1hr, 72 hr, and 15 days following systemic KA-induced seizures at P15 as we have previously observed structural changes within the hippocampus at these time points. Within an hour of KA seizures, a marked swelling of dendrites, disassembly of dendritic microtubules and glycogen depletion are observed by electron microscopy. Within 5 days, basal dendrites of CA3 hippocampal pyramidal neurons show abnormal spine morphology and decreased branching pattern.  15 days after the seizures, aberrant growth of mossy fibers in the CA3 stratum oriens is observed in animals exposed to KA. Ten hippocampi will be pooled from five animals treated with KA (3mg/kg i.p.) and from five littermate controls injected with PBS. Animals will be decapitated and hippocampi will be rapidly dissected from the brain, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80C until extraction of total RNA, which will be sent to the center. We will provide 4 tissue samples-2 controls and 2 KA, each a pool of five animals - for each time points. Mixing tissues from multiple rats will normalize single nucleotide polymorphisms and tissue heterogeneity. Keywords: time-course

