TITLE
Functional differences among human postnatal stem cells of different origin are reflected by their transcriptome

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
GENES ASSOCIATED WITH THE CELL CYCLE, LINEAGE COMMITMENT AND IMMUNOMODULATORY POTENTIAL DISCRIMINATE HUMAN POSTNATAL STEM CELLS OF DIFFERENT ORIGIN. Stem cells hold great promise for future clinical use. Their intrinsic biological properties are, however, not fully understood and many of their therapeutic benefits still unclear. Better understanding of their genetic and biological properties is essential for the development of clinically relevant stem cell applications. The neonatal unrestricted somatic stem cell (USSC) from cord blood has the capacity to differentiate into cells from all three germ layers. Here we investigate the gene expression profile of USSC using the Affymetrix Exon Array platform and compare it with those of bone-marrow derived mesenchymal adult stem cells (BM-MSC) and adipose tissue-derived adult stem cells (AdAS). Extensive data analysis revealed limited variation in the expression profile of the different cell lines from the same origin, while stem cells from different origins showed distinct profiles, with the BM-MSC and AdAS being more closely related to each other than to USSC. Interestingly, USSC expressed genes involved in the cell cycle at much higher levels, indicative of their relatively higher cycling rate (~ 24 hrs as opposed to more than 2 days for BM-MSC and AdAS). They also show higher expression of genes involved in neurogenesis, consistent with their reported neuronal differentiation capacity. The BM-MSC signature indicates that they are primed towards developmental processes of tissues and organs derived from the mesoderm and endoderm. Remarkably, AdAS appear to be highly enriched in immune-related genes. Together, the data suggest that the different mesenchymal stem cell types have distinct gene expression profiles,that reflect their origin and differentiation potential. Keywords: Adult stem cells, developmental biology, gene expression, genomics, human cord blood, mesenchymal stem cells, cell type comparison

DESIGN
Cells from 3 different donors per stem cell type were cultured under proliferative, non-differentiating conditions. Total RNA was isolated and used and hybridized exon array hybridizations in order to generate stem cell type-specific gene expression profiles.

