TITLE
Physiology and genetic activity of Listeria monocytogenes during multi-hurdle stress induced cell death

ORGANISM
Listeria monocytogenes

SUMMARY
The physiological basis of the hypothesis that temperature is the primary governing factor of bacterial cell inactivation under otherwise non-growth permissive conditions was investigated. Application of simultaneous low pH (pH 3.5) and low water activity (aw = 0.9; 2.5 M NaCl) conditions, applied to L. monocytogenes strains Scott A and FW03/0035, and increasing incubation temperature from 25°C up to 45°C resulted in increased permeability to ethidium homodimer-1 and corresponded to accelerated declines in esterase activity and ATP basal levels but did not result in autolysis. Triphasic survival curves were readily observable when sufficiently large cell populations were inactivated at 25°C and 35°C; indicative of a mixture of sensitive and resistant sub-populations. Enrichment-based recovery experiments however indicate that the stress conditions eventually lead to complete loss of reproductive capacity, potentially corresponding to an irreversible collapse of pH homeostasis. Transcriptomic analyses were used to further obtain insights into the physiology of the inactivation process occurring at 25°C. RT-PCR, rifampin-enforced decay and microarray experiments revealed transcripts of tufA and other genes become substantially more stable during inactivation during exposure to combined low pH/aw and during non-growth permissive temperature exposure. Gene transcripts were delineated through K-means clustering that appear to be important for initial survival of combined low pH/aw and include an overrepresentation of SigB-activated genes, the response of which fades with increasing time of inactivation exposure. The microarray component of the experiments had the aim of determining:  i) Gene expression responses of L. monocytogenes strain Scott A when exposed to  a non-growth permissive environment consisting of a broth system acting as a food simulated environment adjusted to low pH (pH 3.5) and low water activity (2.5 M NaCl).  ii) To examine the trend in gene expression over time under inactivating (killing) conditions by applying gene set (functional and regulatory) expression trend analysis and K-means cluster analysis.  iii) To correlate this data to other physiological and mRNA quantification (real-time-PCR) data.

DESIGN
Experimental design:  Two biologically replicated control cultures (each with two technical replicate sper chip) were labelled with Cy3 for each treatment sample for a total of 4 pairs of biological replicates. The treatments consisted of treated (inactivated in brain-heart infusion broth at pH 3.5 and water activity 0.9) L. monocytogenes cells with two biological replicates (each with two technical replicates per chip) labelled with Cy5. The time course (incubation time under inactivating conditions) of treatments was “initial” (20 minutes), 24 h, 48 h, and 72 h.

