TITLE
Investigating the role of OsPDCD5 in rice programmed cell death by inducible expression

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa

SUMMARY
Overexpression of programmed cell death 5 gene (PDCD5) in tumor cells enhances apoptosis triggered by growth factor or serum deprivation, and overexpression of its homolog, OsPDCD5, induces the early death of transgenic plants. In this work, a system of inducible OsPDCD5 expression using a heat shock promoter was developed to study PCD in rice at different developmental stages.The results showed that in three-leaf aged and older seedlings, OsPDCD5 could independently induce PCD. In altered plants, OsPDCD5 expression caused lesion mimic phenotype, abnormal leaf morphology, nuclear condensation, DNA fragmentation, and H2O2 production. But two-leaf aged and younger seedlings seedlings showed no visibly morphological phenotype after OsPDCD5 expression, suggested that young seedlings possessed some mechanism inhibiting OsPDCD5 induced PCD.

DESIGN
The transcripts of 24-day-old transgenic Zhonghua 11 seedlings heat-shocked for 6 h (before the appearance of PCD phenotypes) were compared with untreated seedlings using microarray analysis (3-Leaf Group) to study the genes involved in OsPDCD5 induced PCD. The experiment was also performed using 18-day-old seedlings to discover why OsPDCD5 expression did not induce PCD in very young seedlings (2-Leaf Group). RNA samples were extracted using TRIzol (Invitrogen) as described by the manufacturer. Microarray analyses were carried out using a competitive hybridization method using the Agilent microarray system. All procedures were carried out according to the manufacturer's protocols. Briefly, total RNA from each sample was used to synthesize cRNA and was labeled with cyanine-5 (Cy5)- or cyanine-3 (Cy3)-labeled CTP. The labeled cRNAs (including a heat-shocked and a control sample) were competitively hybridized to the Agilent Rice Oligo Microarrays, and then washed. The hybridized slides were scanned using Agilent DNA Microarray Scanner and data points were extracted using Agilent Feature Extraction software. Two comparisons were made between biologically independent samples.

