TITLE
Comparison of Gene Expression in Lung of Pigs Exhibiting Different Susceptibilities to Glasser's Disease

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
Haemophilus parasuis is the causative agent of Glasser’s disease in pigs, but this bacterium is also routinely isolated from healthy animals. Whether colonization of the respiratory tract ultimately results in the onset of disease is determined by a combination of environmental, bacterial and host factors that are incompletely understood. This study used DNA microarrays to identify genes that were differentially expressed in the lung of colostrum deprived animals previously characterized as being either ‘Resistant’ or ‘Susceptible’ to infection by H. parasuis in a bacterial challenge experiment at either 24 or 72 hours post-inoculation. Gene expression profiles were obtained by comparing gene expression between each group and a pool of ‘Uninfected control’ animals. The aims of the experiment were: 1) To identify genes associated with resistance and susceptibility to H. parasuis. 2) To identify genes associated with the molecular pathology of Glasser's disease. 3) To identify genes involved in the host response to infection in the lung.

DESIGN
Lung tissue RNA from 6 'Fully Resistant' (2 at 24 hours and 4 at 72 hours post-inoculation) and 6 'Susceptible' pigs (2 at 24 hours and 4 at 72 hours post-inoculation), together with pools of RNA from 9 mock inoculated control animals were used in this experiment. This two-colour microarray experiment utilized a reference design. Labelled target DNA from the pool of mock infected control animals (the reference) was co-hybridized with labelled target prepared from individual 'Fully Resistant' or 'Susceptible' animals to a porcine oligonucleotide microarray. Four technical replicates were carried out for each animal (2 sets of dye-swaps);a total of 48 hybridizations. The design allowed for four comparisons to be made: 1. Fully Resistant vs Control at 24 hours. 2) Fully Resistant vs Susceptible at 24 hours. 3) Fully Resistant vs Control at 72 hours. 4) Fully Resistant vs Susceptible at 72 hours.

