TITLE
Muscle gene expression patterns in pigs with divergent phenotypes for fatness traits

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
Background: Marketing products with added-value characteristics is a current trend in livestock production systems. Regarding meat, selection for intramuscular fat and muscular fatty acid composition is a way to improve the palatability and juiciness of meat while assuring a healthy fat content. This represents selecting animal with a different muscular metabolic profile with respect to the extended selection of lean animals.   Results: The present study has analysed the muscular gene expression profiles of 68 commercial Duroc pigs belonging to two groups with extreme phenotypes for traits strongly related with lipid deposition and composition. This has allowed us to compare the physiological and metabolic implications of selecting for each of these extreme groups. Rather than upregulation of a single pathway, the main differences lied on the transcriptional levels of genes related with lipogenesis and lipolysis, revealing the existence of a cycle where triacylglycerols are continuously synthesized and degraded. Most strikingly, several genes which enhanced fatty acid β-oxidation and favoured insulin signalling and glucose uptake were upregulated in the fattest animals, indicating that the events leading to peripheral insulin resistance in humans with increased levels of intramuscular fat and obesity do not take place in these pigs. Moreover, neither was detected the well-characterised low-grade inflammatory state observed in overweighed humans.   Conclusion: As a whole, our data suggest that selection for increasing intramuscular fat content in pigs would lead to a shift but not a disruption of the metabolic homeostasis of muscle cells. Future studies on the post-translational changes affecting protein activity or expression as well as information about protein location within the cell would be needed to fully understand how lipid deposition affects muscle physiology in pigs.

DESIGN
68 gluteus medius samples form 68 animals belonging to two groups of 34 animals each: HIGH group had higher carcass, plasma and muscle fat content; LOW group had lower carcass, plasma and muscle fat content

