TITLE
ATM-dependent Transcriptional Responses to 1.5 Gy Gamma Radiation in Human Lymphocytes

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by neuronal degeneration, telangiectasias, acute cancer predisposition, and hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation (IR).  The gene defective in AT, ATM (for AT-mutated), encodes a protein, pATM that has been found to have IR-inducible kinase activity.  Cells from individuals with AT exhibit severely attenuated cell cycle checkpoints in response to gamma radiation exposure.  pATM has been hypothesized to act as part of a complex that senses DNA damage, in particular, DNA double strand breaks.  We are studying the pATM-dependent gene expression responses to a dose of 1.5 Gy radiation in lymphoblastoid cell lines from multiple individuals with either wild type or mutated ATM.  The gene expression analyses were performed on Agilent Human 1A Oligo chips containing approximately 16,000 60mer probes.  We identified a set of genes whose gene expression changes are ATM-dependent following exposure to 1.5 Gy IR.  This set of genes was tested by real time quantitative PCR analysis.

DESIGN
The study consists of one dose group - 1.5 Gray gamma radiation.  Samples were collected 6 hr following irradiation (treated) or mock irradiation (controls) for each culture.  Each culture has a treated sample and a control sample.  There are cultures from 6 wild-type ATM individuals and cultures from 6 individuals that are ATM-deficient, for a total of 12 cultures.  Hybridizations compared RNA extracted from each individual culture's treated sample against its corresponding control sample, and were performed as dye-flip duplicates (1 replicate in each direction).  Hybridizations were performed on the Human 1A Oligo Chips using low input, direct labeling at Paradigm Genetics Laboratory.  Microarray scanning was performed with the Agilent G2565AA Scanner.  Paradigm Standard Operating Procedures were followed for quality analysis, sample labeling, microarray hybridization and washing, scanning, image analysis and initial data analysis.

