TITLE
Tissue Factor Pathway Inhibitor-2 is Induced by Fluid Shear Stress in Vascular Smooth Muscle

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Tissue Factor Pathway Inhibitor-2 is Induced by Fluid Shear Stress in Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells and Affects Cell Proliferation and Survival Introduction: Vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs) are exposed to fluid shear stress  (FSS) after interventional procedures such as balloon-angioplasty. Whereas the effects  of hemodynamic forces on endothelial cells are explored in detail, the influence of  FSS on smooth muscle cell function is poorly characterized. Here, we investigated the  effect of FSS on SMC gene expression and function.  Methods: Laminar FSS of arterial level (14 dynes/cm2) was applied to SMC cultures  for 24 h in a parallel-plate flow chamber. The effect of FSS on gene expression was  first screened with microarray technology and the results further verified by real time  (RT) PCR and immunoblotting. Protein expression was also studied in the rat carotid  artery after balloon-injury and DNA synthesis and apoptosis was examined in SMCs  in vitro. Results: Microarrays identified tissue-pathway inhibitor-2 (TFPI-2) as the most  differentially expressed gene by FSS in cultured SMCs. The regulatory effect of FSS  on the expression of TFPI-2 was confirmed by RT-PCR and immunobloting  demonstrating a more than 400-fold increase in TFPI-2 expression in SMCs exposed  to FSS compared to static controls and a consistent upregulation at the protein level.  Functionally, SMC proliferation was decreased by FSS and recombinant TFPI-2 was  found to inhibit SMC proliferation and induce SMC apoptosis as indicated by  activation of caspase-3. In vivo, TFPI-2 expression was found to be up-regulated 5, 10  and 20 h after rat carotid balloon-injury and immunohistochemistry demonstrated  TFPI-2 protein in luminal SMCs exposed to FSS in rat carotid intimal hyperplasia 10  days after balloon-injury.  Conclusion: FSS strongly influence gene expression in cultured SMCs and induce  TFPI-2 expression, which is also expressed after rat carotid balloon injury in luminal  SMCs exposed to FSS. Functionally, TFPI-2 may play an important role in vessel wall  repair by regulating SMC proliferation and survival. Further studies are needed to  elucidate the mechanisms by which TFPI-2 control SMC function.

DESIGN
3 x 2 samples from a paired fluid shear stress experiment on smooth muscle cells.

