TITLE
Telmisartan Improves Insulin Resistance with Modulating Adipose Tissue Macrophage Polarization in High Fat-fed Mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Diet-induced obesity is reported to induce a phenotypic switch in adipose tissue macrophages from an antiinflammatory M2 state to a proinflammatory M1 state.   Telmisartan, an angiotensin II type 1 receptor antagonist and a peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma) agonist, reportedly has beneficial effects on insulin sensitivity.  We studied the effects of telmisartan on the adipose tissue macrophage phenotype in high fat-fed mice.  Telmisartan was administered for 5 weeks to high fat-fed C57BL/6 mice.  Insulin sensitivity, macrophage infiltration, and the gene expressions of M1 and M2 markers in epididymal fat tissues were examined.  Insulin- or a glucose-tolerance test showed that telmisartan treatment improved insulin resistance, decreasing the body weight gain, visceral fat weight and adipocyte size without affecting the amount of food intake.  Telmisartan treatment reduced the number of CD11c-positive cells and crown-like structures.  Telmisartan reduced the mRNA expressions of M1 macrophage markers, such as TNF-alpha and IL-6, and increased the expression of M2 markers, such as IL-10 and Mgl2.  The reduction of M1 macrophage markers, as well as the increased gene expression of M2 markers especially IL-10, is a possible mechanism for the improvement of insulin sensitivity by telmisartan.

DESIGN
Six-week-old male C57BL/6J mice were purchased from CLEA Japan.  The mice were fed a chow that contained 10% of its calories from fat (control) or a high-fat diet (HFD) that contained 30% of its calories from fat for 24 weeks.  The high fat-fed mice were randomized to 3 groups.  Either telmisartan (~3 mg/kg/day) in drinking water (HFD+Tel), candesartan (~3 mg/kg/day) in drinking water (HFD+Can), or a HFD without any drugs (HFD) was administered for the next 5 weeks.  Two mice were treated per group. Epididymal adipose tissues were rapidly removed from each mouse.  Gene expression in epididymal fat tissue was analyzed using a GeneChip® system with the Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array, which was spotted with 45,101 probe sets (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA).  Sample preparation for the array hybridization was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  In short, 5 μg of total RNA was used to synthesize double-stranded cDNA using the GeneChip® Expression 3′-Amplification Reagents One-Cycle cDNA Synthesis Kit (Affymetrix).  Biotin-labeled cRNA was then synthesized from the cDNA using GeneChip® Expression 3′-Amplification Reagents for IVT Labeling (Affymetrix).  After fragmentation, the biotinylated cRNA was hybridized to arrays at 45 °C for 16 h.  The arrays were washed, stained with streptavidin-phycoerythrin, and scanned using a probe array scanner.  The scanned chip was analyzed using the GeneChip Analysis Suite software (Affymetrix).  Hybridization intensity data were converted into a presence/absence call for each gene, and changes in gene expression between experiments were detected by a comparison analysis.  Data was shown as the fold change relative to the expression level of normal chow-fed mice.

