TITLE
Immunologic Control of Zika Virus in Rhesus Monkeys

ORGANISM
Macaca mulatta

SUMMARY
Zika virus (ZIKV) is responsible for a major current outbreak in the Americas and has been causally associated with fetal microcephaly as well as Guillain-Barre syndrome in adults.  However, the immune responses associated with controlling ZIKV replication remain poorly characterized.  Here we report a detailed analysis of innate and adaptive immune responses following ZIKV infection in 16 rhesus monkeys.  A robust proinflammatory innate immune response was observed within the first few days of infection, including upregulation of type 1 interferon, which correlated directly with viral loads.  Immunomodulatory pathways, including IL-10 and TGF-β, were also upregulated.  ZIKV-specific neutralizing antibodies emerged rapidly by day 7 and correlated inversely with viral loads, which were undetectable in peripheral blood by day 6-10.  In contrast, virus replication persisted in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for at least 21-42 days in 75% (3 of 4) of the monkeys that received the lowest dose of ZIKV tested, and ZIKV-specific antibodies were essentially undetectable in CSF.  These data suggest that antibodies play a critical role in the rapid control of acute viremia in the periphery but were largely excluded from the central nervous system, allowing viral persistence at this immuonoprivileged site. 16 outbred, Indian-origin, adult male and female rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) were included in this study.  All monkeys were housed at Bioqual, Rockville, MD.  Animals were infected with 103-106 pfu (106-109 vp) of our ZIKV-BR or ZIKV-PR challenge stocks by the s.q. route (N=2/group).  All animal studies were approved by the appropriate Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).

DESIGN
16 outbred, Indian-origin, adult male and female rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) were included in this study.  All monkeys were housed at Bioqual, Rockville, MD.  Animals were infected with 103-106 pfu (106-109 vp) of our ZIKV-BR or ZIKV-PR challenge stocks by the s.c. route (N=2/group).  All animal studies were approved by the appropriate Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).Microarrays were performed on day 0 pre-infection and on day  2 , 4, 6 and 14 post-infection.

