TITLE
Expression data from wild type and Ctip2-/- (Bcl11b) mutant mouse striatum at P0

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Striatal medium spiny neurons (MSN) are critically involved in motor control, and their degeneration is a principal component of Huntington’s disease. We find that the transcription factor Ctip2 (also known as Bcl11b) is central to MSN differentiation and striatal development. Within the striatum, it is expressed by all MSN, while it is excluded from essentially all striatal interneurons. In the absence of Ctip2, MSN do not fully differentiate, as demonstrated by dramatically reduced expression of a large number of MSN markers, including DARPP-32, FOXP1, Chrm4, Reelin, MOR1, GluR1, and Plexin-D1. Furthermore, MSN fail to aggregate into patches, resulting in severely disrupted patch-matrix organization within the striatum. Finally, heterotopic cellular aggregates invade the Ctip2-/- striatum suggesting a failure by MSN to repel these cells in the absence of Ctip2.   In order to investigate the molecular mechanisms that underlie Ctip2-dependent differentiation of MSN and that underlie the patch-matrix disorganization in the mutant striatum, we directly compared gene expression between wild type and mutant striatum at P0. Because CTIP2-expressing MSN constitute 90-95% of the neurons within the striatum, we reasoned that we should be able to detect changes in medium spiny neuron gene expression in Ctip2 null mutants. We microdissected out small regions of striatum at matched locations in wild type and Ctip2-/- mutant littermates at P0 and investigated gene expression with Affymetrix microarrays. We selected the 153 most significant genes and further analyzed them to identify a smaller set of genes of potentially high biological relevance. In order to verify the microarray data and define the distribution of the identified genes in the striatum, we performed in situ hybridization or immunohistochemistry for 12 selected genes: Plexin-D1, Ngef, Nectin-3, Kcnip2, Pcp4L1, Neto1, Basonuclin 2, Fidgetin, Semaphorin 3e, Secretagogin, Unc5d, and Neurotensin. We find that all these genes are either specifically downregulated (Plexin-D1, Ngef, Nectin-3 Kcnip2, Pcp4L1, Neto1), or upregulated (Basonuclin 2, Fidgetin, Semaphorin 3e, Secretagogin, Unc5d, Neurotensin), in the Ctip2-/- striatum, confirming and extending the microarray results. Together, these data indicate that Ctip2 is a critical regulator of MSN differentiation, striatal patch development, and the establishment of the cellular architecture of the striatum. Keywords: mutant analysis

