TITLE
Role of Microglial C5aR1 in the Arctic Alzheimer’s Disease Mouse Model

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
C5aR1, a receptor for the complement activation proinflammatory fragment, C5a, is primarily expressed on cells of the myeloid lineage, and to a lesser extent on endothelial cells and neurons in brain. Previous work demonstrated C5aR1 antagonist, PMX205, decreased amyloid pathology and suppressed cognitive deficits in Alzheimer Disease (AD) mouse models. In the Arctic AD mouse model, genetic deletion of C5aR1 prevented behavior deficits at 10 months. However, the molecular mechanisms of this protection has not been definitively demonstrated.  To understand the role of microglial C5aR1 in the Arctic AD mouse model, we have taken advantage of the CX3CR1GFP and CCR2RFP reporter mice to distinguish microglia as GFP-positive and infiltrating monocytes as GFP and RFP positive, for subsequent transcriptome analysis on specifically sorted myeloid populations from wild type and AD mouse models. Immunohistochemical analysis of mice aged to 2, 5, 7 and 10 months showed no change in amyloid beta (Ab) deposition in the Arctic C5aR1 knockout (KO) mice relative to that seen in the Arctic mice. Of importance, no CCR2+ monocytes/macrophages were found near the plaques in the Arctic brain with or without C5aR1. RNA-seq analysis on microglia from these mice identified inflammation related genes as differentially expressed, with increased expression in the Arctic mice relative to wildtype and decreased expression in the Arctic/C5aR1KO relative to Arctic. In addition, phagosomal-lysosomal proteins and protein degradation pathways that were increased in the Arctic mice were further increased in the Arctic/C5aR1KO mice. These data are consistent with a microglial polarization state with restricted induction of inflammatory genes and enhancement of clearance pathways.

DESIGN
Microglia mRNA profiles of wildtype (WT), C5aR1 knockout (C5aR1KO), Arctic (ARC) and Arctic C5aR1 knockout (ARCKO) mice at 2, 5, 7 and 10-11 month. Duplicates were sequenced for each genotype on Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform.

