TITLE
Expression data from adult and neonatal human platelets

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Understanding the underlying mechanisms of the well-established platelet hyporeactivity in neonates, would be of great relevance for both improving the clinical management of neonates, a population with a higher bleeding risk than adults (especially among sick and preterm infants), and getting new insights onto the regulatory mechanisms of platelet biology. Transcriptome analysis is a useful tool to identify mRNA signature affecting platelet function. However, human fetal/neonatal platelet transcriptome analysis has never been reported. Here, we used, for the first time, mRNA expression array to compare the platelet transcriptome changes during development. Microarray analysis was performed in pure platelet RNA obtained from adult and cord blood, using the same platform in two independent laboratories. A high correlation was obtained between arrays results for both adult and neonate platelet samples. There was also a good agreement between our adult results and those previously reported in three different studies. Gene enrichment analysis demonstrated that immunity- and platelet function-related genes are highly expressed in either developmental stage. Remarkably, 201 genes were found to be differentially expressed along development. In particular, neonatal platelets contain higher levels of mRNA that are associated with protein synthesis and processing, while they carry significantly lower levels of genes related with calcium transport/metabolism and cell signaling (including GNAZ). Overall, our results highlight that variations in platelet transcriptome may underline the hypo-functional phenotype of neonatal platelets, and further support the role of platelets in cellular immune response. A better characterization of the platelet transcriptome across development may help to elucidate the implications of transcriptome changes in different pathological conditions.

DESIGN
Two pools (platelet RNA from 4 newborns or 4 adults) were sent to LC Sciences laboratories (Houston, TX) (referred to as array A). Another pair of pooled platelet RNA, from 2 newborns- or 2 adults was sent to the central Molecular Biology Service of the University of Murcia (Murcia, Spain) (referred to as array B). Both arrays were performed with GeneChip Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) containing 54,675 probes covering 38,500 genes

