TITLE
Genome profiles of chickens infected with infectious bursal disease virus by RNA-seq

ORGANISM
Gallus gallus

SUMMARY
Purpose: To explore the interaction between host and IBDV, RNA-Seq was applied to analyse the transcriptional profiles of the responses of chickens' bursas of Fabricius in the early stage of IBDV infection. Method: Eighteen SPF white leghorn chickens were randomly divided into two groups with 9 chickens for each group: the mock group (the healthy group) and the IBDV-inoculated group (the infection group). Chickens from the infection group were inoculated with 0.1 mL of 103 EID50 IBDV CJ801 stock through eye-nose drops. The chickens from the mock group were kept in a separate isolator and mock challenged with PBS. On days 1, 3 and 7 after infection, 3 chickens from each group were killed for bursa collection. Each bursa was immediately put into liquid nitrogen and then stored in 80 ℃ refrigerator. RNA sequencing was performed with total RNA from bursae from each group at the first two time points and completed by a commercial company. Results: The results displayed that a total of 15546 genes were identified in the chicken bursa libraries. Among the annotated genes, there were 2006 and 4668 differentially expressed genes in the infection group compared with the mock group on day 1 and day 3 post inoculation (1 and 3 dpi), respectively. Moreover, there were 676 common up-regulated and 83 common down-regulated genes in the bursae taken from the chickens infected with IBDV on both 1 and 3 dpi. Meanwhile, there were also some characteristic differentially expressed genes on 1 and 3 dpi. On day 1 after inoculation with IBDV, host responses mainly displayed immune response processes, while metabolic pathways played an important role on day three post infection. Six genes were confirmed by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR. Conclusions: In conclusion, the differential gene expression profile demonstrated with RNA-Seq might offer a better understanding of the molecular interactions between host and IBDV during the early stage of infection.

DESIGN
Gene expression profiles of chickens infected with IBDV on 1 and 3 dpi when compared to mock infected chickens.

