TITLE
Multi-cellular Transcriptional Profiling Reveals an Epigenetic Barrier to Adult Heart Regeneration [RNA-Seq]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background - The inability of the adult mammalian heart to regenerate following injury represents a major barrier in cardiovascular medicine. In contrast, the neonatal mammalian heart retains a transient capacity for regeneration, which is lost shortly after birth. Defining the molecular mechanisms that govern regenerative capacity in the neonatal period remains a central goal in cardiac biology. Here, we construct a transcriptional atlas of multiple cardiac cell populations, which enables comparative analyses of the regenerative (neonatal) versus non-regenerative (adult) state for the first time.  Methods - Cardiomyocytes, fibroblasts, leukocytes and endothelial cells from infarcted and non-infarcted neonatal (P1) and adult (P56) hearts were isolated by enzymatic dissociation and FACS. RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was performed on these cell populations to generate a transcriptomic atlas of the major cardiac cell populations during cardiac development, repair and regeneration. In addition, we surveyed the epigenetic landscape of cardiomyocytes during post-natal maturation by performing deep sequencing of accessible chromatin regions using the Assay for Transposase-Accessible Chromatin (ATAC-seq) from purified cardiomyocyte nuclei (P1, P14 and P56).  Results - Profiling of cardiomyocyte and non-myocyte transcriptional programs uncovered several injury responsive genes across regenerative and non-regenerative time points. However, the majority of transcriptional changes in all cardiac cell types resulted from developmental maturation from neonatal stages to adulthood rather than activation of a distinct regeneration-specific gene program. Furthermore, adult leukocytes and fibroblasts reverted to a neonatal state and re-activated a neonatal proliferative network following infarction. In contrast, cardiomyocytes failed to re-activate the neonatal proliferative network following infarction, which was associated with loss of chromatin accessibility around cell cycle genes during post-natal maturation.  Conclusions – This work provides a comprehensive transcriptional resource of multiple cardiac cell populations during cardiac development, repair and regeneration. Our findings define a transcriptional program underpinning the neonatal regenerative state and identifies an epigenetic barrier to re-induction of the regenerative program in adult cardiomyocytes.

DESIGN
Examination of RNA expression in developing cardiomyocytes isolated at P1 (day 1), P14 (day 14) and P56 (day 56 since birth) in biological triplicate

