TITLE
Comparative Genome Analysis of Programmed DNA Elimination in Nematodes (Parascaris)

ORGANISM
Parascaris univalens

SUMMARY
Programmed DNA elimination is a developmentally regulated process leading to the reproducible loss of specific genomic sequences. DNA elimination occurs in unicellular ciliates and a variety of metazoans including invertebrates and vertebrates. In metazoa, DNA elimination occurs in somatic cells during early development leaving the germline genome intact. Because limited comprehensive analyses of the genome changes have been carried out and high quality reference genomes for organisms that undergo DNA elimination are not available, we generated germline and somatic reference genome sequences of the DNA eliminating pig parasitic nematode Ascaris suum, and the horse parasite, Parascaris univalens.  In addition, we carried out in-depth analyses of DNA elimination in the nematode parasite of humans, Ascaris lumbricoides, and a parasitic nematode of dogs, Toxocara canis. Our analysis of nematode DNA elimination reveals that in all species, repetitive sequences (that differ among the genera) and germline-expressed genes (~1,000-2,000 or 5-10% of the genes) are eliminated. Thirty-five percent of these eliminated genes are conserved among these nematodes, defining a core set of eliminated genes that are preferentially expressed during spermatogenesis.  Our analysis supports the view that DNA elimination in nematodes silences germline expressed genes. Over half of the chromosome break sites are conserved between Ascaris and Parascaris, whereas only 10% are conserved in the more divergent Toxocara canis. Analysis of the chromosomal breakage regions suggests a sequence independent mechanism for DNA breakage followed by telomere healing, with the formation of more accessible chromatin in the break regions prior to DNA elimination. Our chromosomal level genome assemblies and annotations provide comprehensive genomic resources for analysis of DNA elimination, parasitology research, and comparative nematode genome and epigenome studies.

DESIGN
A total of 6 samples are used for this study, including male germline, female germline, embryo, intestine and carcass, and a mixed sample for 5'-end RNA sequencing.

