TITLE
Genome-wide identification and transcriptomic profiling of auxin concentration and signaling related genes in moso bamboo (Phyllostachys heterocycla)

ORGANISM
Phyllostachys edulis

SUMMARY
Auxin is essential for plant growth and development by altering downstream gene expression. Although large progresses have been made on auxin-concentration, distribution and signaling pathways in model plants like Arabidopsis and rice, little is known in moso bamboo which belongs to grass family, and has great economic and social value. Here we performed genome-wide analysis of the key components related to auxin action, and identified 13 YUCCA genes for auxin synthesis, 14 PIN-FORMED/PIN-like (PIN/PILS) proteins 7 AUXIN1/LIKE-AUX1 (AUX1/LAX) family members for auxin transport, 10 auxin binding factors (AFB) for auxin perception, 43 auxin/indole-3-aceticacid (AUX/IAA) and 41 auxin response transcription factors (ARF) genes for auxin signaling in moso bamboo genome. We further performed phylogenetic analysis of those auxin action related genes from Arabidopsis, Oryza sativa and moso bamboo. To know those genes’ ability to response exogenous auxin and to generate a comprehensive transcriptome overview of auxin response in moso Bamboo, we performed RNA_seq analysis. Our data showed that auxin regulates genes related its biosynthesis, transport, signaling. Moreover, we present the interaction between auxin and other phytohormones at the level of transcription. In summary, we identified the key gene families involved in the auxin action pathways in moso bamboo, and generated a transcriptional overview of the auxin response in moso bamboo. Our data open up an opportunity to uncover the precise roles of auxin action pathways in this important species.

DESIGN
bamboo (Phyllostachys heterocycla) one-month-old seedlings were sprayed with 5μM NAA for 4 hours with 1-hour interval, and the root part were dissected for RNA extraction.

PLATFORM
GPL22704 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Phyllostachys edulis)

CITATIONS
29132316

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
