TITLE
Ionizing radiation induces transgenerational effects in DNA methylation in zebrafish

ORGANISM
Danio rerio

SUMMARY
Ionizing radiation is known to cause DNA damage, yet the mechanisms underlying potential transgenerational effects of exposure have been scarcely studied. Previously, we observed effects in offspring of zebrafish exposed to gamma radiation during gametogenesis, including premature hatching, increased malformations and an increase in inflammation and genomic instability, as well as differential expression of more than 2,000 genes. Here, we hypothesize that these effect are mediated by changes of DNA methylation which is inherited by subsequent generations. We assessed DNA methylation in F1 embryos (5.5 hours post fertilization) with whole genome bisulfite sequencing following parental exposure to 8.7 mGy/h for 27 days and followed up 19 differential methylated regions (DMRs) in F2 and F3 embryos. We observed 5658 DMRs in F1 embryos, predominantly located at DMRs previously shown to be dynamic during zebrafish development, as well as at high content GC regions and gene promoters. DMRs were non-randomly distributed, clustered in dense regions at specific genomic locations. Pathway analysis indicated the involvement of DMRs related to similar pathways found with gene expression analysis, such as apoptosis, development and cancers, which could be linked to previous observed developmental defects and genomic instability in the offspring. Amplicon bisulfite sequencing revealed persistent effects up to the F3 generation in 5 out of 15 positively validated F1 DMRs. The results presented in this study indicate that ionizing radiation related effects in offspring are linked to DNA methylation changes that can persist over generations. Monitoring of DNA methylation in progeny could serve as a biomarker to provide an indication of ancestral exposures to ionizing radiation.

DESIGN
6 WGBS samples, 3x F1 Controls and 3x F1 8.7 mGy/h exposed 35 BisPCR2 samples, From F1, F2 and F3 (5x F1 Controls and 5x F1 Exposed), Control DNA (0,25, 50, 75, 100 % methylated)

PLATFORM
GPL21741 Illumina HiSeq 4000 (Danio rerio) GPL21930 Illumina MiSeq (Danio rerio)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

