TITLE
Antiproliferative and Apoptotic Activities of Sequence-Specific Histone Acetyltransferase Inhibitors

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In parallel to monomeric epigenetic regulators, sequence-specific epigenetic regulators represent versatile synthetic dual-target ligands that achieve regulatory control over multi-gene networks. Development of DNA-binding domain (DBD)-HDAC inhibitors and DBD-HAT activators, which result in increased histone acetylation, has become one promising research field. However, there is no report regarding the gene regulatory pattern by sequence-specific epigenetic repressor. We report here for the first time, the synthesis of DBD-HAT inhibitors and demonstrate that these conjugates could retain their dual-target activity using predicted working model of thermal stability assay and in vitro HAT activity assay. Evaluation of antiproliferative activity in cancer cells showed that 2 (with a medium linker length of 13-atom) exhibited the highest antiproliferative activity in p53 wild-type cancer cell lines (IC50 of 1.8-2.6 uM in A549 and MV4-11 cells) and not in p53 mutant cancer cell lines. A mechanistic investigation using microarray analysis and an apoptotic assay showed that the antiproliferative effect of 2 occurred via the up-regulation of p53 target genes, and the subsequent initiation of p53-dependent apoptosis. Our research on sequence-specific dual-target epigenetic repressor offers us an alternative way to modulate HAT-governed therapeutically important genes and contributes to offer a fresh insight into antitumor therapeutics.

DESIGN
Genome-wide gene expression change in A549 by treatment of 646-PIP (Comp.2 and Comp.4) were examined.

PLATFORM
GPL17692 [HuGene-2_1-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 2.1 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Zutao Yu, Junichi Taniguchi, Yulei Wei, Ganesh N. Pandian, Kaori Hashiya, and Toshikazu Bando. Antiproliferative and apoptotic activities of sequence-specific histone acetyltransferase inhibitors. European Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 2017. doi:10.1016/j.ejmech.2017.06.037

