TITLE
Mucin Acts as a Nutrient Source and a Signal for the Differential Expression of Genes Coding for Cellular Processes and Virulence Factors in Acinetobacter baumannii

ORGANISM
Acinetobacter baumannii

SUMMARY
The capacity of Acinetobacter baumannii to persist and cause infections depends on its interaction with abiotic and biotic surfaces, including those found on medical devices and host mucosal surfaces. However, the extracellular stimuli affecting these interactions are poorly understood. Based on our previous observations, we hypothesized that mucin, a glycoprotein secreted by lung epithelial cells, particularly during respiratory infections, significantly alters A. baumannii’s physiology and its interaction with the surrounding environment. Biofilm, virulence and growth assays showed that mucin enhances the interaction of A. baumannii ATCC 19606T with abiotic and biotic surfaces and its cytolytic activity against epithelial cells while serving as a nutrient source. The global effect of mucin on the physiology and virulence of this pathogen is supported by RNA-Seq data showing that its presence results in the differential transcription of 427 predicted protein-coding genes. The reduced expression of ion acquisition genes and the increased transcription of genes coding for energy production together with the detection of mucin degradation indicate that this host glycoprotein is a nutrient source. The increased expression of genes coding for adherence and biofilm biogenesis on abiotic and biotic surfaces, the degradation of phenylacetic acid and the production of an active type 6 secretion system further supports the role mucin plays in virulence. Taken together, our observations indicate that A. baumannii recognizes mucin as an environmental signal, which triggers a response cascade that allows this pathogen to acquire critical nutrients and promotes host-pathogen interactions that play a critical role in the pathogenesis of bacterial infections.

DESIGN
RNAseq of Acinetobacter baumannii ATTC19606T, grown in the presence or absence of mucin, was performed for triplicate samples on an Illumina MiSeq platform.

PLATFORM
GPL19442 Illumina MiSeq (Acinetobacter baumannii)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

