TITLE
Genome-wide transcriptional profiling of avian bone marrow-derived DCs in response to infectious bronchitis virus

ORGANISM
Gallus gallus

SUMMARY
Background： Avian infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) was an major respiratory disease-causing agents that lead to significant losses in birds.  Dendritic cells (DCs), an major antigen-presenting cells, influence viruses pathogenicity as well as host immune response. Expression of host non-coding mRNA changes markedly during infectious bronchitis virus (IBV ) infection of avian, but their role in regulating host immune function to defend IBV infection has not been explored.  Here, microarray, including mRNAs, miRNAs and lncRNAs, were analysed to better understand the interaction between IBV and avian DCs. Results：Firstly, we found that IBV infection can effectively induce avian DCs to become mature. Interestingly, inactivated IBV possess high ability in inducing DC maturation and activating lymphocytes than that in actived IBV stimulated group. Then, result identified that IBV infection induced 1093 upregulated and 845 downregulated mRNAs in avian DCs. Analysis of Gene Ontology suggested that celluar macromolecule and protein location (GO-BP), as well as transcription factor binding (GO-MF) were abundance in IBV infected group. Whilst, pathway analyses suggested that oxidative phosphorylation and T cell receptor signalling pathways might activated in IBV group. Moreover, microRNA (miRNA) and long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) alterations in IBV-stimulated avian DCs were observed. A total of 19 significantly altered (7 up and 12 down) miRNAs and 101 (75 up and 26 down) lncRNAs were identified in IBV-stimulated DCs. Furtherly insight analyses not only gain that regulation of actin cytoskeleton and MAPK signal pathway were contributed to IBV stimulated miRNAs target genes, but also build an regulatory networks based on co-expressed lncRNA and mRNA. Finally, our study identified 2 TF-miRNA (CEBPA-miR1772 and CEBPA-miR21), which we based on to constructed 53 transcription factor (TF)–miRNA–mRNA interactions involving 1 TF, 2 miRNAs, and 53 mRNAs in IBV-stimulated avian DCs.

DESIGN
In the study presented here,cultured avian BMDCs were randomly divided into control group and IBV stimulated group. Each group consisted of three wells of BMDCs from three chickens.

PLATFORM
GPL21649 RIBOBIO chicken 40K v1.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

