TITLE
Understanding the role of microRNAs in the interaction of Aedes aegypti mosquitoes with an insect-specific flavivirus

ORGANISM
Aedes aegypti

SUMMARY
The Flavivirus genus contains some of the most prevalent vector-borne viruses such as dengue, Zika and yellow fever viruses that cause devastating diseases in humans. However, the insect-specific clade of flaviviruses is restricted to mosquito hosts; albeit they have retained the general features of the genus such as genome structure and replication. The interaction between insect-specific flaviviruses (ISFs) and their mosquito hosts are largely unknown. Pathogenic flaviviruses are known to modulate host-derived microRNAs (miRNAs), a class of non-coding RNAs that are important in controlling gene expression. Alteration in miRNAs may represent changes in host gene expression and provide understanding of virus-host interactions. The role of miRNAs in ISF-mosquito interactions is largely unknown. A recently discovered Australian ISF, Palm Creek virus (PCV), has the ability to suppress medically relevant flaviviruses. Here, we investigated the potential involvement of miRNAs in PCV infection using the model mosquito Aedes aegypti. By combining small RNA sequencing and bioinformatics analysis, differentially expressed miRNAs were determined. Our results indicated that PCV infection hardly affects host miRNAs. Out of 101 reported miRNAs of Ae. aegypti, only aae-miR-2940-5p had significant altered expression over the course of infection. However, further analysis of aae-miR-2940-5p revealed that this miRNA does not have any direct impact on PCV replication in vitro. Thus, the results overall suggest that PCV infection has a limited effect on the mosquito miRNA profile and therefore, they may not play a significant role the PCV- Ae. aegypti interaction.

DESIGN
To obtain RNA samples from PCV infections, 4 day old Ae. aegypti mosquitoes (Townsville, Australia strain) were injected with 102.3 virus/ml (106 TCID50/ml) in 200 nl of stock PCV diluted in Opti-MEM medium (Gibco, Invitrogen Corporation, Grand Island, NY) with 3% FBS without antibiotics or antimycotics. Control group mosquitoes were injected with the same growth medium without PCV. Mosquitoes were collected and stored at -80°C on days 2, 6 and 12 post-inoculation. For each day and treatment, 15 mosquitoes were collected and divided into three groups of five mosquitoes, which were pooled to create three biological replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL14869 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Aedes aegypti)

CITATIONS
28699859

