TITLE
Genome-wide profiling of microRNAs revealing novel insights into mutual interactions mechanism between H9N2 avian influenza virus and avian dendritic cells

ORGANISM
Gallus gallus

SUMMARY
Background：Dendritic cells (DCs), have the most important antigen presenting ability and played an irreplaceable role in recognizing and clearing virus. Antiviral responses must rapidly defend against infection while minimizing inflammatory damage, but the mechanisms that regulate the magnitude of response within an infected cell are not well understood. MicroRNA, small non-coding RNAs, that can regulate dendritic cells to inhibit the infection and replication of avian influenza virus. Here, we global analyses how avian DCs response to H9N2 avian influenza virus (AIV) and provide a potential mechanism of how avian microRNA defending H9N2 AIV replication. Results： Here, we global analyses how avian DCs response to H9N2 avian influenza virus (AIV) and provide a potential mechanism of how avian microRNA defending H9N2 AIV replication. First, we found that both active and inactive H9N2 AIV enhance the ability of DCs to present antigens and activate T lymphocytes. Next, total microarray analyses suggested that H9N2 AIV stimulation involved in protein localization, nucleotide binding and leukocyte transendothelial migration and MAPK signal pathways.  Moreover, we construct 551 transcription factor (TF)-microRNA-mRNA loops based on the above analyses. Furthermore, we found that HA fragment could not activate DCs, while truncated HA highly increased the immune function of DCs by activating ERK and STAT3 signal pathway. Last, our insight research not only gained that gga-miR1644 might target to MBNL2 to enhanced avian DCs in inhibiting virus replication, but also suggested that gga-miR6675 target to the NLS of PB1 to trigger the silencing of PB1 genes and lead to inhibition of H9N2 avian influenza viral replication. All together, our innovative research will shed new light on the roles of avian microRNA in evoking avian DCs and inhibiting virus replication, which will suggest new strategies to combat avian influenza virus.

DESIGN
In the study presented here,cultured avian BMDCs were randomly divided into control group and AIV stimulated group. Each group consisted of three wells of BMDCs from three chickens.

PLATFORM
GPL21649 RIBOBIO chicken 40K v1.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

