TITLE
Gene Expression during Model Dough Fermentation after Freezing Preservation of S. cerevisiae Baker’s Yeast Cells

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
Freeze-thaw stress causes various cellular damages, survival and proliferation defects, and metabolic alterations, although how cells cope with it is poorly understood. In this study, model dough fermentations using two different strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae baker’s yeast were compared after two-week cell preservation in the refrigerator or in the freezer. As a result, one strain specifically exhibited a decreased fermentation rate after exposed to freeze-thaw stress. A DNA microarray analysis of the cells during fermentation revealed that the genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation were upregulated after the freeze-thawing process in the stress-sensitive strain, suggesting a metabolism switching from glycolysis to respiration. In the identical strain, however, most of the genes that encode the components of the proteasome complex were commonly downregulated, and ubiquitinated proteins were highly accumulated by freeze-thaw stress. In the cells with a laboratory-strain background, treatment with a proteasome inhibitor MG132 or deletion of each transcriptional activator gene for the proteasomal genes (RPN4, PDR1, or PDR3) led to a marked decrease in the rate of model dough fermentation using the frozen cells. Based on these data, degradation of freeze-thaw damaged proteins by proteasome may guarantee the high fermentation performance. Furthermore, a heterozygous dominant-negative PDR3 allele (A148T/A229V/H336R/L541P) was found in the diploid genome of the stress-sensitive baker’s yeast strain, which may be associated with the decreased fermentation rate. Removal of such responsible mutations may improve the freeze-thaw stress tolerance and the fermentation performance of baker’s yeast strains, as well as other industrial S. cerevisiae yeast strains.

DESIGN
We examined the effects of refrigerating or freezing preservation on gene expression of Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast cells during model dough fermentation by using Agilent Technologies Yeast (v2) Gene Expression 8x15K Microarray. Total RNA samples were extracted from refrigerated cells and frozen cells of two strains (strains A and B) and were subjected for this DNA microarray analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL9825 Agilent-016322 Yeast (V2) Gene Expression 8x15K Microarray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

