TITLE
Perturbational proteomic and transcriptional profiles of drug perturbations from Broad Institute LINCS Proteomic Characterization Center for Signaling and Epigenetics and Broad Institute LINCS Center for Transcriptomics (U54HG008097) (n=5,063)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The Library of Integrated Cellular Signatures (LINCS) is an NIH program which funds the generation of perturbational profiles across multiple cell and perturbation types, as well as read-outs, at a massive scale. The LINCS PCCSE uses two high-throughput liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LCMS) assays to study the proteomic changes induced by drug and genetic perturbations. P100 monitors ~100 phosphorylated peptides from cellular proteins that serve as a reduced representation of the phosphoproteome. GCP monitors ~60 modified peptides from histones (e.g., methylated, acetylated, and combinations thereof) encompassing nearly every well-studied post-translational modification on the core nucleosomal histone proteins. Closely complementing these assays is the L1000 high-throughput gene-expression assay. The files available here contain P100, GCP, and L1000 data for 90 small-molecule perturbations in six cell lines (five cancer cell lines and a neurodevelopmental cell model). These data were generated under the auspices of the NIH LINCS Program (www.lincsproject.org). Note: Related GEO projects include a large corpus of additional L1000 data, available at GSE92742. The Platform for the L1000 data is GPL20573: Broad Institute Human L1000 epsilon http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GPL20573 For questions or assistance with this dataset, please email the Connectivity Map support team at: clue@broadinstitute.org

DESIGN
These data represent three different read-outs (phosphosignaling, chromatin modifications, and transcriptional changes) of the same 90 small-molecule perturbations in six cell lines. The duration of treatment was 3 hours for P100, 24 hours for GCP, and 6 hours for L1000. These data are available at multiple levels of processing: level 1 is fluorescence intensity (for L1000) or mass spectrometry extracted ion chromatogram traces (for P100, GCP); level 2 is gene expression or proteomic values without normalization; level 3 is normalized; and level 4 is differential (i.e., each sample is compared to all other samples on a plate).

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

