TITLE
Epigenetic features of the immunoglobulin kappa locus shape the repertoire of variable genes utilised in V(D)J recombination

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background: V(D)J recombination is an essential process for the generation of diverse antigen receptor (AgR) repertoires. In B cells, immunoglobulin kappa (Igk) light chain locus recombination follows recombination of the immunoglobulin heavy chain (Igh) locus. We recently developed the DNA-based VDJ-seq assay for the unbiased quantitation of Igh VH and DH repertoires. In conjunction with genome-wide datasets for several epigenetic features, we showed that two active chromatin states, located at the recombination signal sequences (RSS) of VH genes, are highly predictive of recombination. The contribution of chromatin features to Vk gene choice in recombination remains poorly understood. Results: We adapted the VDJ-seq assay to profile the Igk VkJk repertoire, and obtained a comprehensive readout of highly variable Vk gene usage in mouse bone marrow pre-B cells. We identified PU.1 binding at the RSS as highly predictive of whether a gene will actively recombine or not. Prediction of the frequency of recombination was more dependent on H3K4 methylation and IKAROS binding. Conclusions: Epigenetic features within the Vk region are able to explain much of the variation in Vk gene usage. Whilst PU.1 binding at the RSS appears to play a binary, all-or-nothing role, priming Vk genes for recombination, the frequency with which these genes recombine is shaped by the presence and enrichment of a number of other epigenetic features. In contrast to the Igh locus, the epigenetic landscape of the promoter as well as the RSS is predictive of Vk gene recombination.

DESIGN
Three VkJk-seq sample replicates from flow-sorted ex vivo WT pre-B cells, and one VkJk-seq sample from flow sorted ex vivo Rag1-/- VH81X pre-B cells

PLATFORM
GPL15103 Illumina HiSeq 1000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

