TITLE
Helicobacter pylori sabA gene is associated with iron deficiency anemia (IDA) in childhood and adolescence

ORGANISM
Helicobacter pylori

SUMMARY
Background  Gastric Helicobacter pylori colonization leads to iron deficiency anemia (IDA), especially in children and adolescents. However the pathogenesis is poorly understood.   Objective  We sought to identify specific H. pylori genes involved in IDA development, by comparing bacterial genome-wide expression profiling in patients affected or not.   Methods   H. pylori were isolated from four children with IDA and four from matched controls without IDA. Based on these isolates, cDNA microarrays under iron-replete or depleted conditions were systematically performed to compare gene expression profiles at the whole genome level. Real-time reverse-transcription (RT-) PCR and protein assays were performed for further assessing the profile differentiation of the identified H. pylori IDA-associated genes.   Results  We identified 29 and 11 genes with significantly higher or lower expression in the IDA isolates compared to non-IDA isolates, respectively. Especially notable were higher expression of sabA gene encoding sialic acid-binding adhesin in the IDA isolates, which was confirmed by real-time RT-PCR study. Moreover, iron-depletion in vitro led to up-regulation of fecA1 and frpB1 genes and down-regulation of pfr, as predicted. Known iron-regulated genes such as fur, pfr, fecA, and feoB did not significantly differ between both groups. The IDA isolates had significantly higher expression of vacuolating cytotoxin gene vacA than non-IDA isolates, consistent with the results of VacA protein assays. There were no significant differences in bacterial growth value between IDA and non-IDA isolates.   Conclusions  It is likely that H. pylori carrying high expression of sabA causes IDA, especially in children and adolescents who have increased daily iron demand. In addition, it is possible that several host-interactive genes, including vacA, may play a synergistic role for sabA in IDA development.

DESIGN
The four H. pylori strains isolated from the IDA patients and 4 strains from other gastric disorder patients were analysed by DNA micro array. In addition, two samples from IDA patients and two control samples were treated with DFM.

PLATFORM
GPL23824 2008-02-20_RDKK017_Hpyl_60mer_4plex

CITATIONS
28854239

