TITLE
Enhanced Inflammatory Transcriptome in the Granulosa Cells of Women With Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Context: Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS), the most common endocrine disorder of reproductive-  aged women, is associated with systemic low-grade inflammation.  Objective: We propose that increased or altered intrafollicular inflammatory reactions also occur  in periovulatory follicles of PCOS patients.  Design: Gene profiling and quantitative PCR (qPCR) analyses in granulosa-lutein cells (GCs) collected  from PCOS and non-PCOS women undergoing in vitro fertilization were compared with  serum and follicular fluid (FF) levels of cytokines and chemokines.  Setting: This was a university-based study.  Patients: Twenty-one PCOS and 45 control patients were recruited: demographic, hormone, body  mass index, and pregnancy outcomes were abstracted from patient data files.  Interventions:GCcytokine/chemokinemRNAswere identified and analyzed by gene-chip microarrays/  qPCR before and after culture withhumanchorionic gonadotropin, DHT, IL-6, or IL-8; serum/FF  cytokine levels were also analyzed.  Main Outcome Measures: Relative serum/FF cytokine levels and GC cytokine expression before and  after culture were compared and related to body mass index.  Results: The following results were found: 1) PCOS GCs express elevated transcripts encoding  cytokines, chemokines, and immune cell markers, 2) based on gene profiling and qPCR analyses,  obese PCOS patients define a distinct PCOS disease subtype with the most dramatic increases in  proinflammatory and immune-related factors, and 3) human chorionic gonadotropin and DHT  increased cytokine production in cultured GCs, whereas cytokines augmented cytokine and vascular  genes, indicating that hyperandrogenism/elevated LH and obesity in PCOS women augment  intrafollicular cytokine production.  Conclusions: Intrafollicular androgens and cytokines likely comprise a local regulatory loop that  impacts GC expression of cytokines and chemokines and the presence of immune cells; this loop is  further enhanced in the obese PCOS subtype.

DESIGN
A direct comparison of human granulosa cells from six different pooled sample groups that were distinct for PCOS status, BMI, and cytokine profile.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
27228368

