TITLE
The evolution of spinable cotton fiber entailed prolonged development and a novel metabolism

ORGANISM
Gossypium herbaceum ; Gossypium longicalyx

SUMMARY
exceptional example of evolutionary innovation is the single-celled seed trichome in Gossypium ( " cotton fiber " ). We have used fiber development in Gossypium as a system to understand how morphology can rapidly evolve.  Fiber has undergone considerable morphological changes between the short, tightly adherent fibers of G. longicalyx and the derived long, spinable fibers of its closest relative, G. herbaceum, that facilitated cotton domestication.  We conducted comparative gene expression profiling across a developmental time-course of fibers from G. longicalyx and G. herbaceum using microarrays with ~ 22,000 genes.  Expression changes between stages were temporally protracted in G. herbaceum relative to G. longicalyx, reflecting a prolongation of the ancestral developmental program.  Gene expression and GO analyses showed that many genes involved with stress responses were up-regulated early in G. longicalyx fiber development.  Several candidate genes up-regulated in G. herbaceum have been implicated in regulating redox levels and cell elongation processes.  Three genes previously shown to modulate hydrogen peroxide levels were consistently expressed in domesticated and wild cotton species with long fibers but expression was not detected by qRT-PCR in wild species with short fibers.  Hydrogen peroxide is important for cell elongation, but at high concentrations it becomes toxic, activating stress processes that may lead to early onset of secondary cell wall synthesis and the end of cell elongation.  These observations suggest that the evolution of long spinable fibers in cotton was accompanied by novel expression of genes assisting in the regulation of reactive oxygen species levels.  Our data suggest a model for the evolutionary origin of a novel morphology through differential gene regulation causing prolongation of an ancestral developmental program. Keywords: Cotton, fiber, evolution, time-point, comparative genomic hybridization, stress response genes, H2O2

DESIGN
A balanced developmental loop design for microarray analysis was performed. For G. herbaceum (A1) and G. longicalyx (F), four fiber developmental time-points, 5, 10, 20 and 25 DPA were sampled. Within each species, hybridizations were performed between each pair of consecutive developmental stages by labeling one with Cy5 and the other with Cy3, and by closing the loop with a comparison of 25 and 5 dpa. In addition, 2 hybridizations were done between species at each time-point, using a dye swap for each pair. With three biological replications and 16 slides each, we generated gene expression data from a total of 48 microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL4808 Cotton_oligonucleotide_array_v2.0

CITATIONS
18248099

