TITLE
Caloric restriction impacts plasma microRNAs in rhesus monkeys

ORGANISM
Macaca mulatta

SUMMARY
Caloric restriction (CR) is one of the most robust interventions shown to delay aging in diverse species, including rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta). Identification of factors involved in CR brings a promise of translatability to human health and aging. Here, we show that CR induced a profound change in abundance of circulating microRNAs (miRNAs) linked to growth and insulin signaling pathway, suggesting that miRNAs are involved in CR’s mechanisms of action in primates. Deep sequencing of plasma RNA extracts enriched for short species revealed a total of 243 unique species of miRNAs including 47 novel species. Approxi- mately 70% of the plasma miRNAs detected were conserved between rhesus monkeys and humans. CR induced or repressed 24 known and 10 novel miRNA species. Regression analysis revealed correlations between bodyweight, adiposity, and insulin sensitivity for 10 of the CR-regulated known miRNAs. Sequence alignment and target identification for these 10 miRNAs identify a role in signaling downstream of the insulin receptor. The highly abundant miR-125a-5p correlated positively with adiposity and negatively with insulin sensitivity and was negatively regulated by CR. Putative target pathways of CR- associated miRNAs were highly enriched for growth and insulin signaling that have previously been implicated in delayed aging. Clustering analysis further pointed to CR-induced miRNA regula- tion of ribosomal, mitochondrial, and spliceosomal pathways. These data are consistent with a model where CR recruits miRNA- based homeostatic mechanisms to coordinate a program of delayed aging.

DESIGN
Serum miRNA profile of rhesus monkeys on calorie restriction or control diet was analyzed. For each group 5 samples were processed. Serum was collected, total RNA was isolated using miRNeasy kit (Qiagen). One fourth (5 μL) of the RNA isolated from each plasma sample was used to construct sequencing libraries with the Illumina TruSeq Small RNA Sample Prep Kit (Illumina). The libraries were pooled in equimolar amounts and submitted to sequencing.

PLATFORM
GPL14954 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Macaca mulatta)

CITATIONS
28677323

