TITLE
A Tripartite Amplification Loop Involving WRKY75, Salicylic Acid and ROS Accelerates Leaf Senescence in Arabidopsis

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Leaf senescence is a highly coordinated and complicated process with the integration of numerous internal and environmental signals. Salicylic acid (SA) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) are two well-defined inducers of leaf senescence, whose contents progressively and inter-dependently increase during leaf senescence via a yet unknown mechanism. Here, we have characterized a newly identified positive regulator of leaf senescence, WRKY75, and demonstrated that knock-down or knock-out of WRKY75 delays, while over-expression of WRKY75 accelerates age-dependent leaf senescence. The WRKY75 transcription is induced by age, SA, H2O2, as well as multiple plant hormones. Meanwhile, WRKY75 is able to promote SA production by inducing the transcription of SA INDUCTION-DEFICIENT 2 (SID2), and suppress H2O2 scavenging partly by repressing the transcription of CATALASE 2 (CAT2). Genetic analysis reveals that the SID2 mutation or an increase of catalase activity rescues the precocious leaf senescence phenotype evoked by WRKY75 over-expression. Based on these results, we propose a “tripartite amplification loop” model in which WRKY75, SA and ROS undergo a gradual but self-sustained rise driven by three interlinked positive feedback regulations. This tripartite amplification loop provides a molecular framework connecting the upstream signals, such as age, ethylene, JA and ABA, to the downstream regulatory network executed by those SA-responsive and H2O2-responsive transcription factors during leaf senescence.

DESIGN
We performed transcriptome profiles analysis of 28-day-old Col-0 and WRKY75RNAi leaves by RNA-seq. The third and fourth leaves of Col-0 and WRKY75RNAi plants were collected and ground into powder in liquid nitrogen. Total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Plant Mini kit (QIAGEN). RNA-sequencing and differential gene expression analysis was performed by the BIOPIC institution at Peking University.

PLATFORM
GPL13222 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Arabidopsis thaliana)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

