TITLE
Inflammatory response of trout head kidney to in vivo challenge with IHN virus and LPS

ORGANISM
Oncorhynchus mykiss

SUMMARY
The response of the trout, O.mykiss, head kidney to bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or active and attenuated infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHNV and attINHV respectively) intraperoniteal challenge, 24 and 72 hours post-injection, was investigated using a salmonid-specific cDNA microarray. The head kidney response to i.p. LPS-induced inflammation in the first instance displays an initial stress reaction involving suppression of major cellular processes, including immune function, followed by a proliferative hematopoietic-type/biogenesis response 3 days after administration. The viral response at the early stage of infection highlights a suppression of hematopoietic and protein biosynthetic function and a stimulation of immune response. In fish infected with IHNV a loss of cellular function including signal transduction, cell cycle and transcriptional activity 72 hours after infection reflects the tissue-specific pathology of IHNV infection. attIHNV treatment on the other hand shows a similar pattern to native IHNV infection at 24 hours however at 72hours a divergence from the viral response is seen and replace with a recovery response more similar to that observed for LPS is observed. Keywords: Viral and LPS transcriptomic response, IHNV, Trout

DESIGN
Rainbow  trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss  were intraperitoneally injected with saline (control) and LPS (6mg/Kg), or with 100 μl of a 106 pfu/ml dilution of IHNV or attIHNV or culture medium (negative control). At defined time points, 24 and 72 hours post i.p. injection, animals (total n=6), control and experimental, were selected from each  tank  (n=2) and  sacrificed. Head kidneys (HK) were immediately dissected out, pooled and processed for total RNA purification using  Tri  Reagent  (Molecular Research Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.The design of the microarray includes 1380 genes printed  in  six  replicates each. Random clones  from common and subtracted  cDNA  libraries  (976)  were  compared  with  the  known  vertebrate  proteins using blastx and 686 genes were identified; the functional annotations were transferred from  the putative homologs. These clones were supplemented with 297 genes selected by the categories of Gene Ontology. Overall, each microarray was enriched in a number of  functional  classes,  such  as  stress  and  defense  response  (145  and  105  genes, respectively), cell cycle (62 genes), signal transduction (114 genes), chaperone activity (41 genes), and apoptosis (79 genes).  Total RNA obtained from head kidney tissue was verified for quantity and integrity by denaturing  electrophoresis  and  labeling  with  Cy3-  and  Cy5-dCTP  (Amersham Pharmacia) was completed using SuperScript  III  reverse  transcriptase  (Invitrogen) and oligo(dT) primer, and cDNA was purified with Microcon YM30 (Millipore). We used a dye swap experimental design and each sample was hybridized to two microarrays. For the first slide, test and control cDNA were labeled with Cy5 and Cy3 respectively, and for  the  second array dye assignment was  reversed. All head  kidney  samples were analyses  using  the  dye  swap  protocol.  Scanning was performed with ScanArray 5000 and  images were processed  with  QuantArray  (GSI  Luminomics. After  subtraction  of mean background, locally weighted non-linear  regression (Lowess) normalization was performed separately for each slide. To assess differential expression of genes, the normalized  log  intensity  ratios  were  analyzed  with  Student’s  t-test  (p < 0.01).  The Bayesian modification to the false discovery rate (FDR) was used to correct for multiple comparison  tests,  estimating  the  q-value  for  the  set  of  differentially  expressed  genes

PLATFORM
GPL6155 UKU_trout_1.3K_v2

CITATIONS
18366750

