TITLE
Separable functions of the PHD finger protein Spp1 in the Set1 and the meiotic DSB forming complexes cooperate for meiotic DSB formation

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
Histone H3K4 methylation is a feature of meiotic recombination hotspots shared by many organisms including plants and mammals. Meiotic recombination is initiated by programmed double-strand break (DSB) formation that in budding yeast takes place in gene promoters and is promoted by histone H3K4 di/trimethylation. This histone modification is recognized by Spp1, a PHD-finger containing protein that belongs to the conserved histone H3K4 methyltransferase Set1 complex. During meiosis, Spp1 binds H3K4me3 and interacts with a DSB protein, Mer2, to promote DSB formation close to gene promoters. How Set1 complex- and Mer2- related functions of Spp1 are connected is not clear. Here we show in budding yeast that Spp1 is present within two distinct complexes in meiotic cells, the Set1 and the Mer2 complexes. Disrupting the Spp1-Mer2 interaction mildly decreases H3K4me3 levels and does not affect meiotic recombination initiation. Conversely, the Spp1-Mer2 interaction is required for normal meiotic recombination initiation, but dispensable for Set1 complex-mediated histone H3K4 methylation. Finally, we evidence that Spp1 preserves normal H3K4me3 levels independently of the Set1 complex. We propose a model where the three populations of Spp1 work sequentially to promote recombination initiation: first by depositing histone H3K4 methylation (Set1 complex), next by ³reading² and protecting histone H3K4 methylation, and finally by making the link with the chromosome axis (Mer2-Spp1 complex). This work deciphers the precise roles of Spp1 in meiotic recombination and opens perspectives to study its functions in other organisms where H3K4me3 is also present at recombination hotspots.

DESIGN
ChIP-chip experiment in meiotic diploid SK1 yeast cells

PLATFORM
GPL4131 Agilent-014810 Yeast Whole Genome ChIP-on-Chip Microarray 4x44K (G4493A)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

