TITLE
Protein acyltransferase DHHC3 regulates breast tumor growth, oxidative stress and senescence.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Protein acyltransferase DHHC3 is upregulated in malignant and metastatic human breast cancer, and its elevated expression correlates with diminished survival not only in human breast cancer but also in six other cancer types. In a direct demonstration of pro-tumor DHHC3 function, ZDHHC3 ablation diminished both MDA-MB-231 mammary cell xenografts growth and the size of metastatic lung colonies. Gene array data and fluorescence dye assays documented increased oxidative stress and senescence in ZDHHC3-ablated cells. Consistent with increased senescence, ZDHHC3-ablated tumors showed enhanced recruitment of innate immune cells (anti-tumor macrophages, NK cells) associated with clearance of senescent tumors. ZDHHC3-ablation effects (decreased tumor growth, increased oxidative stress, increased senescence) were reversed upon reconstitution with wildtype, but not enzyme active site-deficient DHHC3. ZDHHC3-ablation effects on oxidative stress/senescence were also substantially reversed upon concomitant ablation of upregulated oxidative stress driver TXNIP. Diminished DHHC3-dependent palmitoylation of ERGIC3 protein likely plays a key role in TXNIP upregulation. In conclusion, through its palmitoylation activity, DHHC3 supports in vivo breast tumor growth by a mechanism involving negative modulation of tumor cell oxidative stress and senescence.

DESIGN
The MDA-MB-231 cells stably ablated for control and DHHC3 protein expression were injected into nude mice (10 injections each with control and D3 ablated cells), and the tumor volumes were assessed over a 30-day period. Subsequently, the mice were sacrificed, followed by excision of tumors. The small portion of the excised tumors were used for RNA extraction and eventually DNA microarray analysis (two replicates each from control and DHHC3 ablated tumors).

PLATFORM
GPL571 [HG-U133A_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

