TITLE
Gene expression profiling in rat liver after H2 administration with or without dietary stress

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Molecular hydrogen (H2) is a biologically active gas that is used medically to ameliorate various systemic pathological conditions. H2 also regulates gene expression involved in intracellular signaling and metabolic pathways. Therefore, we attempted to identify genes that exhibit similar changes in expression in response to H2 by employing DNA microarrays and gene set enrichment analysis. We found that H2 activated the expression of sets of genes regulated by histone H3K27 methylation status. H2 also modified the expression of many genes regulated by a wide variety of signaling pathways.

DESIGN
We divided 4-week-old male F344 rats into four groups: 1) control/normal diet group: fed with basal rodent chow (CE-2; CLEA Japan Inc., Tokyo, Japan) and reared in air (n = 4), 2) hydrogen-treated/normal diet group: fed with basal rodent chow and hydrogen-rich water in 2% hydrogen/98% air (n = 4), 3) control/CDAA diet group: fed with a choline-deficient L-amino acid-defined diet (CDAA diet; A06083101, Research Diets, Inc., New Brunswick, NJ) and reared in air (n = 4), 4) hydrogen-treated/CDAA diet group: fed with CDAA diet and hydrogen-rich water in 2% hydrogen/98% air (n = 4). Hydrogen-rich water (0.7mM dissolved hydrogen) was generated from distilled water with 0.44 mM Na2SO4 using Aquela Blue, a water-electrolyzing device to produce electrolyzed hydrogen-saturated water near neutral pH (MiZ Co., Ltd, Fujisawa, Japan). The control dehydrogenized water was prepared by gently stirring hydrogen-rich water in open air for 24 hours. Hydrogen-rich water or control water was administrated ad libitum to the rats with a 50-ml closed glass vessel equipped with an outlet line having a ball bearing. After 3-week rearing, the rats were sacrificed and their livers were excised for RNA extraction. Furthermore, we performed DNA microarray analysis to examine changes in the gene expression profiles.

PLATFORM
GPL16985 [HT_Rat230_PM] Affymetrix HT RG-230 PM Array Plate

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

