TITLE
A screening system to identify transcription factors that induce binding site-directed DNA demethylation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: DNA methylation is a fundamental epigenetic modification which is involved in many biological systems such as differentiation and disease. We and other groups recently discovered that a part of transcription factors (TFs) plays a role for site-specificity determination of DNA demethylation in a binding site-directed manner, although number of reports for such TFs are limited.   Results: Here, we develop a screening system to identify TFs which induce the binding site-directed DNA methylation changes. The system consists of ectopic expression of target TFs in model cells and the DNA methylome analysis followed by overrepresentation analysis of the corresponding TF binding motif at differentially methylated regions. Our system successfully identifies binding site-directed demethylation of SPI1 which is known to promote DNA demethylation in a binding-site directed manner. We extend our screening system to 15 master TFs which are involved in cellular differentiations, and identified 8 (RUNX3, GATA2, CEBPB, MAFB, NR4A2, MYOD1, CEBPA and TBX5) novel binding site-directed DNA demethylation inducing TFs. Gene ontology and specifically expressing tissue enrichment analysis revealed that those 8 TFs demethylate genome regions which are associated with corresponding biological roles, supporting performance of our system. We also describe characteristics of the binding site-directed DNA demethylation induced by those TFs; targeting highly methylated CpGs, local DNA demethylation, and overlap of demethylated regions between same family TFs.  Conclusion: Thus, our results emphasize usefulness of the developed screening system for identification of TFs which induce DNA demethylation in a site-directed manner.

DESIGN
Bisulphite converted DNA from the 17 samples were hybridised to the Illumina Infinium 450k Human Methylation Beadchip

PLATFORM
GPL13534 Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (HumanMethylation450_15017482)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

