TITLE
Resequencing of a mutant bearing an iron starvation recovery phenotype defines Slr1658 as a new player in the regulatory network of a model cyanobacterium

ORGANISM
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803

SUMMARY
Photosynthetic microorganisms encounter an erratic nutrient environment characterized by periods of iron limitation and sufficiency. Surviving in such an environment requires mechanisms for handling these transitions. Our study identified a regulatory system involved in the process of recovery from iron limitation in cyanobacteria. We set out to study the role of bacterioferritin co-migratory proteins during transitions in iron bioavailability in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 using knockout strains coupled with physiological and biochemical measurements.   One of the mutants displayed slow recovery from iron limitation. However, we discovered that the cause of the phenotype was not the intended knockout but rather the serendipitous selection of a mutation in an unrelated locus, slr1658. Bioinformatics analysis suggested similarities to two-component systems and a possible regulatory role. Transcriptomic analysis of the recovery from iron limitation showed that the slr1658 mutation had an extensive effect on the expression of genes encoding regulatory proteins, proteins involved in the remodeling and degradation of the photosynthetic apparatus and proteins modulating electron transport. Most significantly, the transcript of the cyanobacterial homolog of the cyclic electron transport protein PGR5 was upregulated 1000-fold in slr1658  disruption mutants. pgr5 transcript in the slr1658 retained these high levels under a range of stress and recovery conditions. The results suggest that slr1658 is part of a regulatory operon that is most probably involved in regulating alternative electron flow. Disruption of its function has deleterious results under oxidative stress promoting conditions.

DESIGN
Cultures of Dslr0242_slr1658m and Dslr0242_slr1658c were sampled 1h before (-1h) and 3, 6, and 24h after iron repletion. Samples were taken in biological replicates

PLATFORM
GPL23938 Agilent-075764 Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 array (Feature number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T
