TITLE
speG affects intracellular replication, polyamine metabolism, and transcriptomes of Salmonella

ORGANISM
Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium str. SL1344

SUMMARY
The speG gene has been reported to regulate polyamine metabolism in Escherichia coli and Shigella, but its role in Salmonella remains unknown. Our preliminary studies have revealed that speG widely affects the transcriptomes of infected in vitro M and Caco-2 cells and that it is required for the intracellular replication of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) in HeLa cells. In this study, we demonstrated that speG plays a time-dependent and cell type-independent role in the intracellular replication of S. Typhimurium. Moreover, high-performance liquid chromatography of four major polyamines demonstrated putrescine, spermine, and cadaverine as the leading polyamines in S. Typhimurium. The deletion of speG significantly increased the levels of the three polyamines in intracellular S. Typhimurium, suggesting the inhibitory effect of speG on the biosynthesis of these polyamines. The deletion of speG was associated with elevated levels of these polyamines in the attenuated intracellular replication of S. Typhimurium in host cells, which was subsequently validated by the dose-dependent suppression of intracellular proliferation after the addition of the polyamines. Furthermore, our RNA transcriptome analysis of S. Typhimurium SL1344 and its speG mutant outside and inside Caco-2 cells revealed that speG regulates the genes with documented virulence in flagellar biosynthesis, fimbrial expression, and functions of types III and I secretion systems. speG also affects the expression of genes that have been rarely reported to correlate with polyamine metabolism, including those associated with the periplasmic nitrate reductase system, glucarate metabolism, the phosphotransferase system, cytochromes, and the succinate reductase complex in S. Typhimurium in the mid-log growth phase, as well as those in the ilv–leu and histidine operons of intracellular S. Typhimurium after invasion in Caco-2 cells. In the present study, we characterized the phenotypes and transcriptome effects of speG in S. Typhimurium and reviewed the relevant literature to facilitate a more comprehensive understanding of the key role of speG in the polyamine metabolism and virulence regulation of Salmonella.

DESIGN
In this study, we examined whether the deletion of speG affects the intracellular proliferation of S. Typhimurium in various human cells. Subsequently, we studied the polyamine metabolism of S. Typhimurium and the effect of speG by quantifying the four major polyamines in extracellular and intracellular wild-type and speG-deleted strains. We verified whether the accumulation of polyamines suppresses the intracellular proliferation of S. Typhimurium. Moreover, we investigated how speG regulates the transcriptome of S. Typhimurium before and after invasion in human intestinal epithelium.

PLATFORM
GPL23939 Agilent-061231 Custom Salmonella GE 8x15k Microarray [ProbeName version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

