TITLE
Rat expression data after acute FSH suppression

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
To unravel the genes that underpin the effects of FSH on spermatogenesis, testicular gene expression was compared in juvenile rats after FSH suppression to littermate controls.  Based on existing data, it is apparent that the dominant function of FSH shifts between 9 and 18 day postpartum (dpp) during the first wave of spermatogenesis from driving Sertoli cell proliferation to support of germ cells.  To enable comprehensive analysis of the impact of acute in vivo FSH suppression on Sertoli and germ cell development and to determine the genes that underpin these affects, FSH was selectively suppressed in Sprague Dawley rats by passive immunisation for 4 days prior to testis collection at 18 days postpartum. FSH suppression did not affect Sertoli cell proliferation at 18 dpp, but germ cell numbers were decreased at 18 dpp following FSH suppression, with a corresponding increase in germ cell apoptosis measured. Sixty transcripts were measured as changed at 18 dpp in response to 4 days of FSH suppression, as assessed using Affymetrix™ microarrays.  Some of these are known as Sertoli cell-derived FSH-responsive genes (e.g. StAR, cathepsin L, insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3), while others encode proteins involved in cell cycle and survival regulation (e.g. cyclin D1, scavenger receptor class B 1). These data demonstrate that FSH affects germ cells in vivo, by supporting germ cell viability at day 18. This model enabled identification of candidate genes that contribute to the FSH-mediated pathway by which Sertoli cells support germ cells. Keywords: time course

DESIGN
Sprague Dawley male rats at day 14 postpartum received either a rat FSH antibody raised in sheep or a control sheep immunoglobulin for 4 days. RNA was extracted from the testis and hybridisation on Affymetrix microarrays was conducted.

PLATFORM
GPL85 [RG_U34A] Affymetrix Rat Genome U34 Array

CITATIONS
16135663

