TITLE
Zymomonas mobilis oxygen stress responses

ORGANISM
Zymomonas mobilis

SUMMARY
Zymomonas mobilis ZM4 produces near theoretical yields of ethanol with high specific productivity and recombinant strains are able to ferment both C-5 and C-6 sugars. However, the genetic and physiological basis of the ZM4 response to various industrially-relevant stresses is poorly understood. In this study, the dynamics of ZM4 oxygen stress responses were elucidated by characterizing the transcriptomic and metabolomic profiles of aerobic and anaerobic fermentations using whole-genome microarray analysis and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. In the absence of oxygen, ZM4 consumed glucose more rapidly, had a higher growth rate, and ethanol was the major end-product. Under aerobic conditions, much less ethanol was observed with other end-products produced, including acetate, lactate, and acetoin. In the early exponential phase, no genes were detected as being significantly differentially expressed between aerobic and anaerobic conditions via microarray analysis. However, microarray analysis of the stationary phase cultures revealed that 166 genes were significantly differentially expressed by more than two-fold. Quantitative-PCR validated the expression values for seventeen genes from different categories of stationary phase microarray data. Transcripts for Entner-Doudoroff  pathway genes  and gene pdc, encoding a key enzyme leading to the ethanol production, were at least 30-fold more abundant under anaerobic conditions at stationary phase based on quantitative-PCR results. Expression of stress response genes was found to be greater under oxygen stress conditions. GC-MS analysis of stationary phase intracellular metabolites indicated that ZM4 under anaerobic conditions contained lower levels of amino acids, glucose and ED pathway intermediates, whereas metabolites such as ribitol, trehalose, myristic acid, glyceric acid, glucose 6-phosphate, mannose 6-phosphate, and 4-hydroxybutanoic acid were more abundant than under aerobic conditions. Transcriptomic and metabolomic data were consistent with faster glucose consumption and greater ethanol production under anaerobic conditions and suggested gene targets for deletion and improved fermentation. Keywords: Time course/ Stress Response

DESIGN
A total of 24 samples were analyzed. These consisted of two times points, (3 hours and 26 hours) under two conditions (anaerobic and aerobic).  There were 3 biological replicates and two dye swaps.  Each microarray containted one to two probes per predicted coding sequence.

PLATFORM
GPL6431 ZMOBCombimatrixplatform

CITATIONS
19154596

