TITLE
Microarray of S100β-v-erbB/p53-/- cells cultured in normoxia, hypoxia, hypoxia with Brefeldin A (0.1uM) and hypoxia EHT-1864 (1uM).

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
High-grade gliomas (HGGs) include the most common and the most aggressive primary brain tumor of adults and children. Despite multimodality treatment, most high grade gliomas eventually recur and are ultimately incurable. Several studies suggest that the initiation, progression, and recurrence of gliomas are driven, at least partly, by cancer stem-like cells. A defining characteristic of these cancer stem-like cells is their capacity to self-renew. We have identified a hypoxia-induced pathway that utilizes the Hypoxia Inducible Factor 1α (HIF-1α) transcription factor and the JAK1/2-STAT3 (Janus Kinase 1/2 - Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3) axis to enhance the self-renewal of glioma stem-like cells. Hypoxia is a commonly found pathologic feature of HGGs. Under hypoxic conditions, HIF-1α levels are greatly increased in glioma stem-like cells. Increased HIF-1α activates the JAK1/2-STAT3 axis and enhances tumor stem-like cell self-renewal. Our data further demonstrate the importance of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) secretion for this pathway of hypoxia-mediated self-renewal. Brefeldin A and EHT-1864, agents that significantly inhibit VEGF secretion, decreased stem cell self-renewal, inhibited tumor growth, and increased the survival of mice allografted with S100β-v-erbB/p53-/- glioma stem-like cells. These agents also inhibit the expression of a hypoxia gene expression signature that is associated with decreased survival of HGG patients. These findings suggest that targeting the secretion of extracellular, autocrine/paracrine mediators of glioma stem-like cell self-renewal could potentially contribute to the treatment of HGG.

DESIGN
Three independent S100β-v-erbB/p53-/- TSC1 cell cultures were treated with either DMSO control, BFA (1uM), or EHT-1864 (1uM) grown in hypoxia or normoxia (16h). Then collected for Trizol mRNA, and microarray analysis on the Clarion S mouse array.

PLATFORM
GPL23038 [Clariom_S_Mouse] Affymetrix Mouse Clariom S Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

