TITLE
The landscape of A-to-I RNA editome from 462 individuals human genomes

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
A-to-I editing, as a post-transcriptional modification process mediated by ADAR, plays a crucial role in many biological process in metazoans. However, how and to what extent that A-to-I editing diversifies and shapes the population diversity at the RNA level is largely unknown. We employed 462 mRNA-sequencing data from five populations of the Geuvadis Project and identified 545,649 A-to-I editing sites, forming a landscape of RNA editome of the human genome. By exploration of RNA editing within and between populations, we discovered non-adaption of nonsynonymous editing in the evolution, and revealed geographic restriction of rare editing sites. Moreover, we showed that RNA editing can characterize the subtle but substantial divergence between different populations, especially those from different continents. Altogether, we demonstrated RNA editing can well depict the nature and structure of populations at RNA level, which provides insights into the process of how A-to-I editing shapes population diversity at transcriptomic level. Our work will facilitate the understanding of the landscape of RNA editome at population-scale, and be helpful to interpret difference in the distribution and prevalence of disease among individuals and across populations.

DESIGN
We employed 462 mRNA sequencing samples from the CEU, FIN, GBR, TSI and YRI populations from Geuvadis project (ENA study accession number:ERP001942; BioProject accession number: PRJEB3366; home page: http://www.geuvadis.org/web/geuvadis/rnaseq-project ) and identified a total of 545,649 A-to-I editing sites. By analyzing the sharing of identified RNA editing sites in each population and among populations, we revealed that the landscape of human RNA editome could reflect unique nature of human populations. We present a broad representation of A-to-I RNA editome from human genomes, which will be of immense use to future studies in investigating RNA editing at population level. data processing: mRNA-seq reads were aligned to the hg19 genome assembly using STAR(version 2.5.2b) with default parameter. data processing: Duplicated reads that mapped to the same location were removed using Picard(version 1.141)( https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/ ) with default parameter. data processing: Reads with a mapping quality < 20 were removed using samtools(version 1.3.1) with parameter '-q 20'. data processing: Variants were called using the GATK(version 3.5.0) HaplotypeCaller tool with options stand_call_conf of 20 and stand_emit_conf of 0. data processing: Candidate RNA editing site were called using the following filtering steps: (1) all variants present in dbSNP (except SNPs of molecular type “cDNA”, database version 137, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/ ) and the 1000 Genomes Project were removed; (2) variants located in the first 6 bp from either end of a sequence read were discarded; (3) in non-Alu regions, we removed sites in simple repeats according to RepeatMasker annotation, discarded intronic candidates if they were located within 4 bp of all known splicing junctions according to Ensembl gene annotations, and removed sites in homopolymer runs of ≥5 bp; (4) variant sites in regions of high similarity to other parts of the genome were discarded using the BLAST-like alignment tool (BLAT); (5) the editing type of each site was inferred based on the strand of overlapping annotated genes and only A-to-I base changing editing sites were retainned. data processing: Genome build: hg19 data processing: Tab-delimited text files include basic information of identified A-to-I editing sites for each sample;  basic information includes chromosome, position, strand, reference base, altered base, edting level of each A-to-I editing site. The SRA Run accessions used in this reanalysis study are listed in the supplementary file names.

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

