TITLE
Gene expression profiling of hepatocarcinogenesis in a mouse model of chronic hepatitis B

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a common complication of chronic viral hepatitis. In support of this notion, we have reported that hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)-specific CD8+ T lymphocytes critically contribute to inducing chronic liver cell injury that exerts high carcinogenic potential in a hepatitis B virus (HBV) Tg mouse model. The dynamics of the molecular signatures responsible for hepatocellular carcinogenesis are not fully understood. The current study was designed to determine the serial changes in gene expression profiles in a model of chronic immune-mediated hepatitis. METHODS: Three-month-old HBV Tg mice were immunologically reconstituted with bone marrow cells and splenocytes from syngeneic nonTg donors. Liver tissues were obtained every three months until 18 months at which time all mice developed multiple liver tumors. Nitrative DNA lesions and hepatocyte turnover were assessed immunohistochemically. Gene expression profiles were generated by extracting total RNA from the tissues and analyzing by microarray. RESULTS: The nitrative DNA lesions and the regenerative proliferation of hepatocytes were increased during the progression of chronic liver disease. In a gene expression profile analysis of liver samples, the chemokine- and T cell receptor (TCR)-mediated pathways were enhanced during chronic hepatitis, and the EGF- and VEGF-mediated pathways were induced in HCC. Among these molecules, the protein levels of STAT3 were greatly enhanced in all hepatocyte nuclei and further elevated in the cytoplasm in HCC tissue samples at 18 months, and the levels of phosphorylated TP53 (p-p53-Ser 6 and -Ser 15) were increased in liver tissues. CONCLUSIONS: HBV-specific immune responses caused unique molecular signatures in the liver tissues of chronic hepatitis and triggered subsequent carcinogenic gene expression profiles in a mouse model. The results suggest a plausible molecular basis responsible for HBV-induced immune pathogenesis of HCC.

DESIGN
The comprehensive gene expression profiles in the mouse livers, five immunologically reconstituted HBV Tg mice were sacrificed on day 7 and every three months until 18 months. The comparison combinations used in this analysis were the average values of log-ratios against Tg mix of Tg7d, Tg1M, Tg3M, Tg6M, Tg9M, Tg12M, Tg15M, Tg18M, and tumor (Tg18M) and the log ratios of Tg18M/Tg mix and tumor (Tg18M)/ Tg mix.

PLATFORM
GPL2872 Agilent-012694 Whole Mouse Genome G4122A (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
28968425

