TITLE
Discovering the process of bladder healing as the milestone for its regeneration

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Molecular mechanism underlying regeneration process, triggered by stem cells in tissue engineered urinary bladder, is still poorly explained. The study aimed to explore underlining pathways associated with regeneration process in urinary bladder reconstructed with stem cell seeded graft. The study was performed on 110 Wistar rats. Urinary bladders were augmented with bladder acellular matrix (BAM)(n=52) or BAM seeded with adipose derived  stem cells (ADSCs)(n=52). The process of bladder healing was analyzed at 7, 30, 90 and 180 days postoperatively. Gene expression was evaluated using microarrays and analyzed in GeneSpring Software. Gene ontology (GO) and pathway enrichment analyses of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were performed. A total of 4023, 4674, 7997 and 1120 of DEGs between the bladders augmented with ADSCs seeded BAM and BAM only were identified at 7, 30, 90 and 180 days postoperatively, respectively. The DEGs were enriched in GO terms associated with cellular and intercellular events, morphogenesis, epithelium, smooth muscles and nerves regeneration, angiogenesis, inflammatory response and wound healing. Numerous differentially expressed pathways between the bladders augmented with ADSCs seeded BAM and BAM only were identified. In conclusion, this study provided the unequivocal evidence that stem cells changed healing milieu in tissue engineered urinary bladder and indicated underlying pathways that can be associated with regeneration process triggered by stem cells.

DESIGN
The study was performed on 110 Wistar rats. Urinary bladders were augmented with bladder acellular matrix (BAM)(n=52) or BAM seeded with adipose derived stem cells (ADSCs)(n=52). The process of bladder healing was analyzed at 7, 30, 90 and 180 days postoperatively.

PLATFORM
GPL14797 Agilent-028279 SurePrint G3 Rat GE 8x60K Microarray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

