TITLE
Malaria Host Pathogen Interaction Center Experiment 04R: Host and parasite gene transcript abundances, from whole blood, of Macaca mulatta infected Plasmodium cynomolgi treated with artemether over 7 time points in a 100 day study

ORGANISM
Macaca mulatta

SUMMARY
This project is part of the Malaria Host-Pathogen Interaction Center (MaHPIC) - is a transdisciplinary malaria systems biology research program supported by an NIH/NIAID contract (# HHSN272201200031C; see http://www.systemsbiology.emory.edu ). The MaHPIC generates many data types (e.g., clinical, hematological, parasitological, metabolomics, functional genomics, lipidomics, proteomics, immune response) and mathematical models, to iteratively test and develop hypotheses related to the complex host-parasite dynamics in the course of malaria in non-human primates (NHPs), and metabolomics data via collaborations with investigators conducting clinical studies in malaria endemic countries, with the overarching goal of better understanding human disease, pathogenesis, and immunity. Curation and maintenance of all data and metadata are the responsibility of the MaHPIC. 

DESIGN
Malaria-naive male rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta), approximately three years of age, were inoculated intravenously with salivary gland sporozoites produced and isolated at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention from multiple Anopheles species (An. dirus, An. gambiae, and An. stephensi) and then profiled for clinical, hematological, parasitological, immunological, functional genomic, lipidomic, proteomic, and metabolomic measurements. The experiment was designed for 100 days, and pre- and post-100 day periods to prepare subjects and administer curative treatments respectively. The anti-malarial drug artemether was subcuratively administered selectively to several subjects during the primary parasitemia to suppress clinical complications and to all animals for curative treatment of blood-stage infections to allow detection of relapses. One subject was euthanized during the 100-day experimental period due to clinical complications. The anti-malarial drugs primaquine and chloroquine were administered to all remaining subjects at the end of the study for curative treatment of the liver and blood-stage infections, respectively. Capillary blood samples were collected daily for the measurement of CBCs, reticulocytes, and parasitemias. Capillary blood samples were collected every other day to obtain plasma for metabolomic analysis. Venous blood and bone marrow samples were collected at seven time points for functional genomic, proteomic, lipidomic, and immunological analyses. Within the MaHPIC, this project is known as ‘Experiment 04R’. This dataset was produced by Dr. Steven E. Bosinger, Nirav Patel and Greg Tharp at the Emory University Yerkes Genomics Core. To access other publicly available results from E04R and other MaHPIC Experiments, including clinical results (specifics on drugs administered, diet, and veterinary interventions), and other omics, visit http://plasmodb.org/plasmo/mahpic.jsp. This page will be updated as datasets are released to the public. E04R is a 'resequencing' of the same samples from E04. Resequencing for E04R was processed with SOPs and technology consistent with that used for E23R, E24, and  E25 so that results from these experiments could be reliably compared.  E04R does not replace E04, these are distinct datasets. Relative to E04, E04R is only for MaHPIC Yerkes Sequencing and Functional Genomics results.  Only E04R is intended for comparison with E23R, E24, and E25.The experimental design and protocols for this study were approved by the Emory University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).

PLATFORM
GPL23804 Illumina HiSeq 3000 (Macaca mulatta)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

