TITLE
Healthy adult and sJIA blood stimulation with innate immune ligands

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The goal of this study was to characterize altered inducible immune networks in Systemic onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA), an IL-1-driven autoinflammatory disease of unknown etiology. To this end, we developed a high-throughput assay that quantifies the transcriptional and protein-level responses of blood leukocytes to innate stimuli. Herein, we report transcriptional data from healthy adult blood stimulated with 16 different conditions, including TLR ligands, cytosolic receptor ligands and inflammatory cytokines. We further report blood transcriptional profiles from sJIA patients with various disease activity and treatment statuses, both ex vivo (baseline) and after in vitro stimulation with a subset of innate stimuli including heat-killed bacterial pathogens.

DESIGN
291 total samples, 31 donors and 17 stimuli (excluding media controls). All stimuli were not used with all donors. There is one technical replicate for donors BD1277, BD1350, BD1635 for all stimuli - the replicate was run in a later batch (larger barcode number). Stimuli used were agonists for surface Toll-like receptors (CpG-C, R837,  R848, TLR8L, Flagellin, LPS), a protein kinase C activator (PMA/I: phorbol myristate acetate and ionomycin), cytokines (IFNalpha, IFNgamma, IL-17A/F,  IL-18, IL-1beta, TNFalpha), gram+ derived ligands (PGN, LTA), and  heat-killed Staph. aureus (HKSA) as well as heat-killed Staph enteric (HKSE). Ligands were diluted in medium (RPMI 1640 with GlutaMax, Thermo Fisher  Scientific, Grand Island, NY, USA) and aliquoted into 2 mL polypropylene  96-well plates (Greiner Bio-One, Monroe, NC, USA). Blood was drawn in the  morning into the BD Vacutainers containing ACD anticoagulant (BD, Franklin  Lakes, NJ, USA). Time between blood draw and culture setup was less than  2h. Blood and appropriately diluted ligands were mixed in 1:1 ratio in  total volume of 1 mL/well and incubated for 6h at 37oC/5% CO2. After the culture, blood was mixed and  100 uL aliquot set aside for activation marker phenotyping and  intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) for IL-1b. The plate was then  centrifuged at 12,000 x g/15  and 400 mL of plasma aliquoted and stored at  -80oC until the Luminex analysis. The pellet was the  lysed with Tempus  solution (Tempus blood RNA tubes, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 2:1 ratio  and stored at -20oC until the RNA extraction. Please note that data were analyzed using either V1 manifest (pre-Oct 2010) or the V2 manifest (post-Oct 2010) as indicated in the sample title. Sample Group abbreviation definitions: sIU - SoJIA, Inactive, Untreated sAU - SoJIA, Active, Untreated sIU - SoJIA, Inactive, Anakinra

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

