TITLE
DNA methylation in blood from neonatal screening cards and the association with BMI and insulin sensitivity in early childhood

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
There is increasing evidence that metabolic diseases originate in early life, and epigenetic changes have been implicated as key drivers of this early life programming. This led to the hypothesis that epigenetic marks present at birth may predict an individual’s future risk of obesity and type 2 diabetes. In this study, we assessed whether epigenetic marks in blood of newborn children were associated with BMI and insulin sensitivity later in childhood. DNA methylation was measured in neonatal blood spot samples of 439 children using the Illumina Infinium 450k BeadChip. Associations were assessed between DNA methylation at birth and BMI z-scores, body fat mass, fasting plasma glucose, insulin and HOMA-IR at age 5 years, as well as birthweight, maternal BMI and smoking status. No individual methylation sites at birth were associated with obesity or insulin sensitivity measures at 5 years. DNA methylation in 69 genomic regions at birth was associated with BMI z-scores at age 5 years, and in 63 regions with HOMA-IR. The methylation changes were generally small ( < 5%), except for a region near the non-coding RNA nc886 (VTRNA2-1) where a clear link between methylation status at birth and BMI in childhood was observed (P=0.001). Associations were also found between DNA methylation, maternal smoking, and birth weight. We identified a number of DNA methylation regions at birth that were associated with obesity or insulin sensitivity measurements in childhood. These findings support the mounting evidence on the role of epigenetics in programming of metabolic health. Whether many of these small changes in DNA methylation are causally related to the health outcomes, and of clinical relevance, remains to be determined, but the nc886 region represents a promising obesity risk marker that warrants further investigation.

DESIGN
Illumina HumanMethylation450K BeadChip arrays were used for genome-wide methylation profiling of blood DNA samples of 438 children at birth and 148 children at age 5 years.

PLATFORM
GPL13534 Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (HumanMethylation450_15017482)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

