TITLE
High expression of SerpinA1 and SerpinA3 in HLA-positive cervical cell carcinomas

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In cervical cancer, an important mechanism by which tumour cells escape immune surveillance is loss of HLA class I, enabling tumours to evade recognition and lysis by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Some tumours, however, escape from immune surveillance without accumulating defects in antigen presentation. We hypothesized that tumours with no or partial loss of HLA class I develop alternative mechanisms to prevent immune surveillance. To investigate this hypothesis, genome-wide expression profiling using Illumina arrays was performed on cervical squamous cell carcinomas showing overall loss of HLA class I, partial and normal HLA class I protein expression. Statistical analyses revealed no significant differences in gene expression between tumours with partial (n = 11) and normal HLA class I expression (n = 10). Comparison of tumours with normal/partial HLA class I expression (n = 21) with those with overall loss of HLA class I expression (n = 11) identified 150 differentially expressed genes. Most of these genes were involved in the defense response (n = 27), and, in particular, inflammatory and acute phase responses. Especially SerpinA1 and SerpinA3 were found to be upregulated in HLA positive tumours (3.6 and 8.2 fold, respectively), and this was confirmed by real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry. In a group of 117 tumours, high SerpinA1 and SerpinA3 expression in association with normal/partial HLA expression correlated significantly with poor overall survival (p = 0.035 and p = 0.05, respectively). This study shows that HLA positive tumours are characterized by a higher expression of genes associated with an inflammatory profile and that expression of the acute phase proteins SerpinA1 and SerpinA3 in HLA positive tumours is associated with worse prognosis. Keywords: Cell type comparison

DESIGN
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded squamous cervical carcinomas from 68 patients who underwent radical hysterectomy with bilateral lymphadenectomy between 1991 and 2005 at Leiden University Medical Center, were collected. From these 68 patients, 32 snap-frozen tissues were chosen for subsequent gene expression profiling. The percentage of tumour cells was estimated by visual examination of HE-stained frozen tissue sections (5 μm). Only tissue blocks with areas that contained at least 60% viable tumour cells were selected. The 32 selected tumours were divided in three groups: group A, tumours with less than 5% or no HLA class I positive tumour cells (n = 11); group B, tumours with no or partial loss of HLA class I expression and LOH at 6p21.3 (n = 11); and group C, tumours with normal HLA class I expression and no LOH at 6p21.3 (n = 10). Group C included 5 cases with minimal loss, defined as weak expression of HLA-A or HLA-B/C. Statistical analysis revealed no differentially expressed genes between group B and C. Only 15 genes were significantly differentially expressed between group A and B, and 15 genes between group A and C. Since no differences in gene expression were observed between the groups with HLA expression (B and C), we combined the samples of group B and C into one group. Overall, 150 genes were significantly differentially expressed between the HLA negative group (group A, n = 11) and the HLA positive group (group B/C, n = 21)

PLATFORM
GPL2507 Sentrix Human-6 Expression BeadChip

CITATIONS
18438953

