TITLE
Gene expression patterns in roots of Camelina sativa with enhanced salinity tolerance arising from growth in soil treated with plant growth promoting bacteria producing ACC deaminase or from expression of the corresponding acdS gene in transgenic lines

ORGANISM
Camelina sativa

SUMMARY
Gene expression patterns in roots of Camelina sativa with enhanced salinity tolerance arising from growth in soil treated with plant growth promoting bacteria producing 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate deaminase (ACC deaminase) or from expression of the corresponding acdS gene in transgenic lines. Salinity stress negatively affects crop production. However in camelina, grown in soils treated with PGPB producing 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate deaminase (acdS ) or transgenic lines expressing acdS exhibited increased salinity tolerance. AcdS reducing the level of stress ethylene to below the point where it is inhibitory to growth. Gene expression patterns in roots responding to salt stress was affected by the expression of acdS under the control of CaMV 35S or root-specific (rolD) promoters in transgenic lines, or by growth in soils treated with endophytic PGPB producing acdS indicate that the number of the genes were differentially expressed were more assigned to genome III in transgenic plants however in PGPB treated plants the number of the genes were differentially expressed were almost equally assigned to all three genomes. Different promoter may induce different set or even different homeologues genes in camelina with probably the same function in response to salt stress. Though root is not a photosynthetic tissue reduction of the ethylene in root cells has positive effect on plant photosynthetic machinery. The expression of the genes involved in minor CHO metabolism was up-regulated mainly in roots of acdS contain plants during salt stress. Moderate reduction in ethylene production has positive effect on root growth during salt stress but reduction of the ethylene higher than a certain level has negative effect on root growth due to reduction of the expression of the genes involved in root cell elongation. AcdS gene modulating the level of ROS in cells in the level that induce ROS signaling but preventing cellular damage by make a balance on up and down-regulation of the genes involved in oxidation-reduction process in root cells under salinity stress. The acdS containing PGPB (8R6) were mostly effected the ethylene signaling and ABA biosynthesis and signaling in positive way but transgenic line depends to the promoter affecting Auxin, JA and BR signaling or biosynthesis.

DESIGN
Four experimental conditions were tested:  the parental Camelina (DH55), a transgenic with acdS contitutively expressed (35S::acdS), a transgenic with acdS most highly expressed in roots  (rolD::acdS), and DH55 exposed to a plant growth promoting bacteria expressing acdS (8R6).  Camelina roots (DH55, 35S::acdS, rolD::acdS, PGPB (8R6)) with salt treatment were analyzed.  3 replicates of each were compared.

PLATFORM
GPL23882 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Camelina sativa)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

