TITLE
Transcriptome analysis reveals determinant stages controlling human embryonic stem cell commitment to neuronal cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Proper neural commitment is essential for ensuring the appropriate development of the human brain and for preventing neurodevelopmental diseases such as autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia, and intellectual disorders. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the neural commitment in humans remain elusive. Here, we report the establishment of a neural differentiation system based on human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and on comprehensive RNA-Seq analysis of transcriptome dynamics during early hESC differentiation. Using weighted gene co-expression network analysis, we reveal that the hESC neurodevelopmental trajectory has five stages: pluripotency (day 0), differentiation initiation (days 2, 4, and 6), neural commitment (days 8–10), neural progenitor cell proliferation (days 12, 14, and 16), and neuronal differentiation (days 18, 20, and 22). These stages were characterized by unique module genes, which may recapitulate the early human cortical development. Moreover, a comparison of our RNA-Seq data with several other transcriptome profiling datasets from mice and humans indicated that module 3 associated with the day 8–10 stage is a critical window of fate switch from the pluripotency to the neural lineage. Interestingly, at this stage, no key extrinsic signals were activated. In contrast, using CRISPR-Cas9–mediated gene knockouts, we also found that intrinsic hub transcription factors, including the schizophrenia-associated SIX3 gene and septo-optic dysplasia–related HESX1 gene, are required to program hESC neural determination. Our results improve the understanding of the mechanism of neural commitment in the human brain and may help elucidate the etiology of human mental disorders and advance therapies for managing these conditions.

DESIGN
RNA-sequencing of twelve samples prepared every other day between hESC neuronal differentiation day 0 to day 22 .

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
28972157

