TITLE
Effect of long-term sodium arsenite treatment on transcriptomic profiles in progenitor and differentiated HepaRG cells.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Inorganic arsenic, a ubiquitous environmental contaminant of food and drinking water, is a human carcinogen associated with lung, liver, prostate, renal, and bladder cancers.  It has been postulated that inorganic arsenic targets stem cells or partially differentiated progenitor cells, causing their oncogenic transformation.  This is proposed to be one of the key mechanisms in arsenic-associated carcinogenesis; however, the underlying mechanisms for this process remain largely unknown.  To address this question, human liver HepaRG cells, at progenitor and differentiated states, were continuously treated with a non-cytotoxic concentration of 1 μM sodium arsenite (NaAsO2).  Briefly, in Experiment 1, three days after the initial seeding, 1 μM NaAsO2 was added to the media and the cells were maintained in the NaAsO2-containing media for an additional 25 days.  In Experiment 2, fourteen days after the initial seeding, 1 μM NaAsO2 was added to the media and the cells were maintained in the NaAsO2-containing media for an additional 14 days.  In Experiment 1 and Experiment 2, control and NaAsO2-treated cells were harvested on the 28th day after the initial seeding.  In Experiment 3, twenty-eight days after the initial seeding, the terminally-differentiated cells were treated continuously with 1 μM NaAsO2 for an additional 14 days and then harvested. Transcriptomic analysis of NaAsO2-treated progenitor-like HepaRG cells (Experiment 1 and Experiment 2) identified 743 and 639 differentially expressed genes, respectively, among which 343 genes were expressed in common. Pathway analysis of common differentially expressed genes demonstrated a substantial inhibition of cellular metabolic pathways, mainly lipid and xenobiotic metabolism, and cell death pathways.  In contrast, cell proliferation, cell survival, and inflammation, were substantially activated. Treatment of differentiated HepaRG cells with NaAsO2 (Experiment 3) resulted in prominent gene expression changes, with a total of 1058 transcripts being significantly different from the control HepaRG cells.  Pathway analysis of differentially expressed genes in NaAsO2-treated cells differentiated HepaRG cells showed activation of cellular death-associated pathways and inhibition of cell survival and cell proliferation.

DESIGN
In Experiment 1, three days after the initial seeding, 1 μM NaAsO2 was added to the media and the cells were maintained in the NaAsO2-containing media for an additional 25 days.  On the 28th day after the initial seeding, cells were harvested by mild trypsinization, washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and frozen immediately at -80°C for subsequent analyses. In Experiment 2, fourteen days after the initial seeding, 1 μM NaAsO2 was added to the media and the cells were maintained in the NaAsO2-containing media for an additional 14 days.  On the 28th day from the beginning of the study, cells were harvested by mild trypsinization, washed in PBS, and frozen immediately at -80°C for subsequent analyses. In Experiment 3, twenty-eight days after the initial seeding, the terminally-differentiated cells were treated continuously with 1 μM NaAsO2 for an additional 14 days.  The cells were then harvested by mild trypsinization, washed in PBS, and frozen immediately at -80°C for subsequent analyses. Following the treatment, gene expression profiles of control and s NaAsO2-treated HepaRG cells was examined.

PLATFORM
GPL16699 Agilent-039494 SurePrint G3 Human GE v2 8x60K Microarray 039381 (Feature Number version) GPL20844 Agilent-072363 SurePrint G3 Human GE v3 8x60K Microarray 039494 [Feature Number Version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

