TITLE
Sex-dependent and HNF4alpha-dependent Mouse Liver Gene Expression

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
A series of dual-channel gene expression profiles obtained using Rosetta/Agilent  Whole Mouse Genome oligonucleotide microarrays, 4 x 44K format, was used to identify sex-dependent and HNF4alpha-dependent differences in gene expression in adult mouse liver. This series is comprised of four sex-genotype combinations: adult male wild-type liver (M-WT), adult female wild-type liver (F-WT), adult male liver-specific HNF4alpha knockout liver (M-KO) and adult female liver-specific HNF4alpha knockout liver (F-KO). Four pools, each comprised of 4 randomly selected individual liver RNAs, were prepared for each sex-genotype combination. The pools were paired randomly to generate 4 separate experimental comparisons: M-WT:F-WT (first array comparison), M-WT:M-KO (second array comparison), F-WT:F-KO (third array comparison), and M-KO:F-KO (fourth array comparison). A total of 4994 HNF4alpha-dependent genes were identified, of which ~1000 fewer genes responded to the loss of HNF4alpha in female liver as compared to male liver. Moreover, 90% of the genes showing sex-specific expression in the liver were shown to lose sex specificity in HNF4alpha-deficient liver. Keywords: genetic knockout and sex response

DESIGN
An Alexa555-labeled cDNA sample is co-hybridized with an Alexa647-labeled cDNA sample. The samples are then dye-swapped and compared again on a second microarray chip. Together, these two mixed cDNA samples are considered a fluorescent reverse pair (dye swap). Similarly, a second fluorescent reverse pair is generated and the two pairs are averaged. The normalized expression ratio for each array is reported along with the two separate intensities. In this way, dye swaps were carried out for each of the four experimental comparisons. Thus, four microarrays, one for each mixed cDNA sample, were hybridized for each of the four fluorescent reverse pairs, giving a total of 16 microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
18276827

