TITLE
INDUCTION OF OXIDATIVE STRESS AND METAL BINDING GENES IN HUMAN ALVEOLAR MACROPHAGES EXPOSED TO FINE PARTICLES

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Exposure to particulate matter (PM) is consistently associated with increased morbidity and mortality attributable in part to respiratory illnesses. The alveolar macrophage (AM) is one of the cell types in the lung constantly exposed to and activated by ambient pollutants. Upon contact with environmental particulate pollutants, AM produces reactive oxygen species (ROS) and antioxidant enzymes, but the scope of this oxidative stress response induced by PM remains poorly defined. In this study, we used microarray analysis to determine the gene expression profile in human alveolar macrophages upon exposure to PM and sought to gain more insight into the global response of pro- and anti-oxidant enzymes to PM exposure. Human AM were obtained by bronchoscopy from normal individuals. They were then incubated with Chapel Hill PM2.5 (1 ug/ml) or vehicle for 4 hours (n = 6 independent samples each). mRNAs were extracted, amplified and hybridized to Agilent Human 1A microarray. Differentially expressed genes were identified by Statistical Analysis for Microarrays (SAM) with a FDR of 10% and a P ≤ 0.05. Significant genes were also mapped with Gene Ontology (GO) based on their molecular function. We found 34 and 41 up- and down-regulated genes respectively. Of these, 22 genes (~30%) were involved in metal binding and 14 genes were linked to oxidative stress, including 5 metallothionein-1 (MT1) isoform genes. In lung cells, addition of MT-1F in the medium attenuated PM2.5-induced H2O2 production while knockdown of MT1F gene expression increased H2O2 and IL-6 release induced by PM2.5. Our microarray experiments provided a global view of gene expression after in vitro PM2.5 exposure in human AM. The expression profile was most notable for differential expression of genes related to metal binding and oxidative stress, especially upregulation of MT1 isoform genes. Our findings suggest that metals associated with PM, e.g., zinc, copper, and arsenic, induce MT-1 and may be the primary mediators for PM-induced oxidative stress. Keywords: in vitro exposure, PM2.5 particle treatment, human alveolar macrophages

