TITLE
Analysis of gene expression in human adipose tissue-derived multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells lacking GARP/LRRC32

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) have been shown to promote tissue repair and inhibit inflammatory/autoimmune responses in preclinical and human clinical trials A major problem for MSC-based therapies is the need to expand MSCs in vitro due to the low frequency of MSCs in tissues and the large numbers of cells needed/patient (1-10 x 10^6 cells/kg). The expansion of MSCs is associated with several problems including loss of homing capacity, onset of cellular senescence, decrease in differentiation capacityand susceptibility to genomic instability and malignant transformation, limiting the utility of MSCs as a cell-based therapy.   We have recently reported that murine adipose tissue-derived MSCs (mASCs) and human ASCs (hASCs) express glycoprotein A repetitions predominant (GARP)/leucine-rich repeat-containing 32 (LRRC32). GARP binds LAP/TGF-β1 to the surface of mASCs and hASCs, regulating their secretion and activation of TGF-β1 and promoting their immunomodulatory capacity. Interestingly, silencing of GARP in ASCs significantly decreased their proliferative capacity but the mechanisms remain unknown. As the proliferative capacity of MSCs is fundamental for their success in therapy, we have aimed at understanding how GARP modulates the expansion of MSC.

DESIGN
Human adipose-tissue derived multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells (hASCs) obtained from three unrelated healthy donors were transduced with two distinct LVs, each encoding for a distinct human GARP-specific shRNA (MISSION® shRNA plasmid DNAs, RefSeq: SHCLND-NM_005512; Sigma-Aldrich), referred to as LV#18 (TRCN0000005218) and LV#19 (TRCN0000005219). A MISSION® pLKO.1-puro non-mammalian shRNA control plasmid (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) was used as control (LV-CTRL). Non-transduced (NT) hASCs were also used as control.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

