TITLE
Malaria Host Pathogen Interaction Center Experiment 25: Host and parasite gene transcript abundances, from whole blood, of Macaca mulatta infected Plasmodium cynomolgi strain ceylonensis treated with artemether over 5 time points in a 61 day study.

ORGANISM
Macaca mulatta

SUMMARY
This project is part of the Malaria Host-Pathogen Interaction Center (MaHPIC) - is a transdisciplinary malaria systems biology research program supported by an NIH/NIAID contract (# HHSN272201200031C; see http://www.systemsbiology.emory.edu ). The MaHPIC generates many data types (e.g., clinical, hematological, parasitological, metabolomics, functional genomics, lipidomics, proteomics, immune response) and mathematical models, to iteratively test and develop hypotheses related to the complex host-parasite dynamics in the course of malaria in non-human primates (NHPs), and metabolomics data via collaborations with investigators conducting clinical studies in malaria endemic countries, with the overarching goal of better understanding human disease, pathogenesis, and immunity. Curation and maintenance of all data and metadata are the responsibility of the MaHPIC. 

DESIGN
Male rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta), cleared of previous infection with  P. cynomolgi B strain via treatment with the anti-malarial drugs artemether, chloroquine, and primaquine,  approximately five years of age, were inoculated intravenously with salivary gland sporozoites produced and isolated at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention from multiple Anopheles species (An. dirus, An. gambiae, and An. stephensi) and then profiled for clinical, hematological, parasitological, immunological, functional genomic, lipidomic, proteomic, and metabolomic measurements. The experiment included, 8 pre-inoculation days, 49 experiment days, and 4 post-experiment days.  Pre- and post-experiment days were used to prepare subjects and administer post-experiment curative treatments respectively.  The anti-malarial drug artemether was subcuratively administered to subjects at the initial peak of infection, if subjects were not able to self-resolve their parasitemias.  Peak infection was determined clinically for each subject.  The anti-malarial drugs primaquine and chloroquine were administered to all subjects at the end of the study for curative treatment of the liver and blood-stage infections, respectively.  Capillary blood samples were collected daily for the measurement of CBCs, reticulocytes, and parasitemias. Capillary blood samples were collected every other day to obtain plasma for metabolomic analysis. Venous blood samples were collected at five time points for functional genomic, lipidomic, proteomic, and immunological analyses. Within the MaHPIC, this project is known as ‘Experiment 25’.  This is the third and final of a series of experiments that includes infection of malaria-naïve subjects (Experiment 23, P. cynomolgi B strain) and homologous challenge (Experiment 24, P. cynomolgi B strain) of individuals from the same cohort.  This dataset was produced by This dataset was produced by Dr. Steven E. Bosinger, Nirav Patel, and Greg Tharp at the Emory University Yerkes Genomics Core.  To access other publicly available results from E25 and other MaHPIC Experiments, including clinical results (specifics on drugs administered, diet, and veterinary interventions), and other omics, visit http://plasmodb.org/plasmo/mahpic.jsp .  This page will be updated as datasets are released to the public.  The experimental design and protocols for this study were approved by the Emory University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).

PLATFORM
GPL23804 Illumina HiSeq 3000 (Macaca mulatta)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

