TITLE
Molecular regulation mechanism of cold acclimation and cold tolerance in tea leaves

ORGANISM
Camellia sinensis

SUMMARY
Recently, intensive global climate change has become a major factor impacting plant survival during the winter. Freezing cold temperatures during the winter and abnormal temperature fluctuations during the winter and early spring are the most harmful ambient factors threatening tea plant winter survival and currently cause marked economic losses in tea production. In this study, by simulating natural climate change, we established cold acclimation (CA) and rapid cold stress (after CA) conditions to comprehensively investigate the transcriptome changes involved in CA and rapid cold stress. Electrolyte leakage (EL) rate and expression profile clustering analyses confirmed that the experimental design was valid. Comparative transcription analysis identified many differentially expressed genes (DEGs) involved in both processes. Time course and pathway enrichment analyses further revealed the physiological changes that occur during the initial period of CA and the cell wall changes that occur throughout the entire CA process; these changes play crucial roles in increasing freezing tolerance during this process. Compared with CA, different cold response mechanisms were rapidly activated under cold stress; however, the subsequent accumulation of reactive oxygen species, which affect multiple aspects, caused by freezing cold could be the harshest factor impairing tea leaves. Moreover, we investigated 60 DEGs shared by both processes and highlighted the importance of KCSs, HXXXD-type acyl-transferase family proteins, NAC080, SWEETs and ENOs in the responses to various cold conditions. These results greatly improve our knowledge of cold response mechanisms in tea plants and provide meaningful information for functional studies investigating cold tolerance-related genes.

DESIGN
Total of 8 biosamples including cold acclimation treatment and freezing cold treatment, triplication were applied. Therefore 24 microarray were used in this study.

PLATFORM
GPL24061 Agilent-042949 wxc_9_2 042948 Camellia sinensis

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

