TITLE
Identifying Compartment-specific Alloimmune Targets After Renal Transplantation by integrated genomics

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Microarray technology has evolved as a powerful tool over the last decade, to identify biomarkers and study the mechanisms of diseases. We propose a novel application of integrated genomics by combining transcriptional levels with serological antibody profiling after kidney transplantation, with the aim of uncovering the relative immunogenicity of seven different renal compartments after allo-transplantation. Thirty-six paired pre- and post-transplant serum samples were examined from eighteen transplant recipients, across 5,056 protein targets on the ProtoArray V3.0 platform. Normal renal compartment-specific gene expression data from a cDNA platform were re-analyzed and both the cDNA and the ProtoArray platforms were re-annotated to most up-to-date NCBI gene identifiers; 3,835 genes/proteins are measured on both platforms. Antibody levels were ranked for individual patients and the hypergeometric enrichment statistic was applied on mapped compartment-specific expression data. We discovered that after transplantation, in addition to HLA and MICA responses, temporal alloimmune responses are seen against non-HLA antigens specific to different compartments of the kidney, with highest level responses noted against renal pelvis and cortex specific antigens. The renal medulla is of low immunogenicity as none of the outer or inner medulla specific targets generated significant post-transplant antibody responses. Immunohistochemistry confirmed pelvis and cortex specific localizations of selected targeted antigens, supporting the robust nature of this discovery. This study provides a road map of renal compartment-specific non-HLA antigenic targets responsible for generating alloimmune responses, opening the door for clinical correlations with post-transplant dysfunctional states to be determined. Keywords: alloimmune response after kidney transplantation

DESIGN
Plasma profiling using Protein Microarray: Serum antibodies were profiled using Invitrogen ProtoArray® Human Protein Microarray v3.0 technology (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). This platform contains 5,056 non-redundant human proteins expressed in a baculovirus system, purified from insect cells and printed in duplicate onto a nitrocellulose-coated glass slide. Five mL serum diluted in PBST buffer at 1:150 was applied for 90 minutes onto the Protoarray, after blocking with blocking buffer for 1 hour. The slides were then washed with 5ml fresh PBST buffer, 4 times for 10 minutes each, and probed with secondary antibody (goat anti-human Alexa 647, Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) for 90 minutes. Finally, after a second washing with PBST buffer, the slides were dried and scanned using a fluorescent microarray scanner (GSI Luminoics Perkin-Elmer scanner). All steps were carried out on a rotating platform at 4 ºC. ProtoArray data acquisition and measurement: The slides were scanned at a PMT gain of 60% with a laser power of 90% and a focus point of 0 μm. Fluorescence intensity data were acquired using GenePix Pro 6.0 software (Molecular devices, Sunnyvale, CA) with the appropriate “.gal” file downloaded from the ProtoArray central portal on the Invitrogen website ( http://www.invitrogen.com/protoarray ) by submitting the barcode of each ProtoArray slide.

PLATFORM
GPL6454 ProtoArray Human Protein Microarray v3.0

CITATIONS
19251643 , 20923235

