TITLE
microRNAs and their targets engage in apple-Valsa mali interaction

ORGANISM
Malus domestica

SUMMARY
miRNAs were important regulators involving in plant-pathogen interactions. However, their roles in apple response to Valsa canker pathogen (Valsa mali, Vm) infection were poorly understood. In this study, we constructed two miRNA libraries using the bark tissues of apple twig (Malus domestica Borkh “Fuji”) inoculated with Vm (IVm) and PDA medium (control, BMd). Among the all miRNAs, 23 miRNAs were specifically isolated in BMd and 39 miRNAs were specifically isolated in IVm. Compared with BMd, the expression of 294 miRNAs decreased, and 172 miRNAs increased in IVm, respectively. We also identified the target genes of these miRNAs using degradome sequencing technology. In total, 353 differentially expressed miRNAs during the pathogen infection were detected to target 1 077 unigenes with 2 251 cleavage sites. Based on GO and KEGG analysis, the genes were found to be mainly related to transcription regulation and signal transduction. We further selected 17 miRNAs and 22 corresponding target genes to detect the expression profiles during pathogen infection. The results indicate that most of them are involved in apple twig-Vm interaction. What’s more, miRNAs and their corresponding target genes seem to regulate the apple twig-Vm interaction by forming many complicated regulation networks. It is worth that a conserved miRNAs mdm-miR482b, which was down regulated in IVm compared with BMd, has 14 potential target genes, and most of them were disease resistance related genes. More important, the feedback regulation of sRNA pathway in apple twig was much more complex and critical in the interaction between apple bark tissue and V. mali. The results provide insights into the crucial functions of miRNAs in the woody plant, apple tree-Vm interaction.

DESIGN
miRNAs were isolated using high-throughput sequence analysis and their corresponding target genes were identified using degradome sequencing technology.

PLATFORM
GPL20848 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Malus domestica)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

LIBSTRATS
:MIRNA-SEQ
