TITLE
Comparative Solanum wild species transcription profiles under controlled water stress conditions

ORGANISM
Solanum tuberosum

SUMMARY
The aim of the present work is to apply microarrays to identify candidate genes associated with the strategies adopted by different Solanum wild species to maintain their metabolism and limit the harm under water stress conditions. Wild genotypes are a rich source of novel genes for introduction into cultivated species to enhance stress tolerance. The mechanisms in which genes act can involve different pathways inside the cell, resulting in the expression of stress responsive genes. We will identify genes whose expression change in the leaves of potato plants subjected to drought stress. We will analyze different Solanum genotypes in six moments of water stress (0,1,3,5,7 & 10 days after initiation of stress). We will selected 4 time-points (days 0,5,7 & 10) and 2 genotypes (with divergence behavior) for microarrays analysis. The candidate genes obtained with this approach will be validated by semi-quantitative northern blot analysis (Typhoon scanner) and/or RT-PCR in each time-point of treatment and with all wild genotypes in study. This will help us to get a better understanding respect the dynamics of expression of a great number of genes in response to stress, as well as to establish functional relations between the involved genes. Research Plan: 5-weeks-old Solanum wild species plants were randomly sorted in 2 groups (25 plants per group). One group was submitted to non-irrigated conditions, withholding water and the other was normally watered. For microarray analysis, leaflets tissue from 4 plants per group of 4 time-points (days 0,5,7, & 10) were pooled, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at –80°C.RNA of the pool was extracted following TRIZOL method (Invitrogen). RNA integrity was verified on agarose gel. Hybridizations were performed with n genotypes,t time-points and r repeats. The hybridizations proposed in this experiment to enhance statistical robustness of data will be: 32 slides = n*t*r ; (2 genotypes; 4 time-points; 4 repeats (dye-swap). Keywords: Direct comparison

