TITLE
Identification of candidate genes associated with breast muscle of broilers exposed to atmospheric ammonia using RNA sequencing

ORGANISM
Gallus gallus

SUMMARY
Abstract: Ammonia is one of the most prominent air pollutants in poultry houses. High levels of ammonia have adverse effects on respiratory health, growth performance, meat production of broilers, and breast meat growth and yield are critical important in the broiler industry. To date, studies focus on the negative relationship of ammonia exposure and breast muscle tissue are still very limited, and the underlying molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood. In this study, high concentrations of atmospheric ammonia were found to lower slaughter rate and broiler breast meat yield significantly (P < 0.05). To explore the candidate genes that ammonia regulates breast meat yield of broilers, high throughout RNA-Seq was used to compare the transcriptome of breast muscle with different ammonia exposure (50 ppm vs 3 ppm). In total, 129 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified (P-value < 0.05; fold-change ≥ 2), among which 87 genes were significantly down-regulated and 42 were up-regulated. Bioinformatics analysis suggested that DEGs (such as PDK4, ACSL1, GLUL, FBXO32) were involved in fatty acid degradation/metabolism, nitrogen metabolism, PPAR signaling and adipocytokine signaling pathways. Functional annotation showed that DEGs were mainly enriched in reactive oxygen species metabolic process and muscle contraction. It can be concluded that decreased meat yield was due to the DEGs participating in above biological processes and pathways. This study provides novel insights into transcriptional differences in breast meat between high- and low-ammonia exposed broiler chickens.

DESIGN
Breast muscle mRNA profiles of 42-day old Arbor Acres male broilers exposed to  50 ppm (treatment) concentrations of atmospheric ammonia were generated by RNA sequencing, in triplicate, using Illumina HiSeq2000.

PLATFORM
GPL16133 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Gallus gallus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

