TITLE
EXECUTER1- and EXECUTER2-dependent transfer of stress signals from the plastid to the nucleus of Arabidopsis thaliana

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Shortly after the release of singlet oxygen (1O2), drastic changes in  nuclear gene expression occur in the conditional flu mutant of  Arabidopsis that reveal a rapid transfer of signals from the plastid  to the nucleus. In contrast to retrograde control of nuclear gene  expression by plastid signals described earlier, the primary effect  of 1O2 generation in the flu mutant is not the control of chloroplast  biogenesis but the activation of a broad range of signaling pathways  known to be involved in biotic and abiotic stress responses.  This activity of a plastid-derived signal suggests a new function of  the chloroplast, namely that of a sensor of environmental changes  that activates a broad range of stress responses. Inactivation of the  plastid protein EXECUTER1 attenuates the extent of 1O2-induced  up-regulation of nuclear gene expression, but it does not fully  eliminate these changes. A second related nuclear-encoded protein,  dubbed EXECUTER2, has been identified that is also implicated  with the signaling of 1O2-dependent nuclear gene expression  changes. Like EXECUTER1, EXECUTER2 is confined to the plastid.  Inactivation of both EXECUTER proteins in the ex1/ex2/flu triple  mutant is sufficient to suppress the up-regulation of almost all  1O2-responsive genes. Retrograde control of 1O2-responsive genes  requires the concerted action of both EXECUTER proteins within  the plastid compartment. Keywords: biotic and abiotic stress response, nuclear gene expression, plastid-derived signal, Col-0 ecotype, continuous light and then dark-incubated plants

DESIGN
Two individual biologica replicates, each containing material of five mature plants of wild  type, flu, ex1/flu, ex2/flu, and ex1/ex2/flu, respectively, were used for  the microarray analysis. Plants were germinated on soil and kept  under continuous light until the beginning of bolting and then  transferred to the dark for 8 h. Dark-incubated mature plants were  reilluminated for 30 min and subsequently harvested for RNA extraction. The EX1 (At4g33630) T-DNA insertion line SALK 002088 and EX2 (At1g27510) T-DNA insertion line  SALK 012127 were obtained from the European Arabidopsis Stock  Centre (NASC). Homozygous mutant lines were identified by PCR  analysis by using T-DNA-, EX1- and EX2-specific primers. Both  T-DNA-lines were crossed with a flu Col-0 line that had been  obtained by 5 backcrosses of flu1-1 in Landsberg erecta with  wild-type Columbia. The ex1/flu and ex2/flu mutant lines were  crossed, and within the segregating F2 population triple mutants  were identified by PCR-based genotyping. For the cultivation of mature plants, seeds of wild type, flu, ex1/flu, ex2/flu, and ex1/ex2/flu,  all in Col-0 ecotype, were sown on soil and plants were grown under  continuous light (100  mol m 2 s 1).

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
17540731

