TITLE
Genome-wide gene expression in soleus muscle of rats artificially selected for high and low running capacity

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Purpose: Aerobic capacity is a strong predictor of cardiovascular mortality. To determine the relationship between inborn aerobic capacity and soleus gene expression we examined genome-wide gene expression in soleus muscle of rats artificially selected for high and low running capacity (HCR and LCR, respectively) over 16 generations. The artificial selection of LCR caused accumulation of risk factors of cardiovascular disease similar to the metabolic syndrome seen in man, whereas HCR had markedly better cardiac function. We also studied alterations in gene expression in response to exercise training in the two groups, since accumulating evidence indicates that exercise has profound beneficial effects on the metabolic syndrome. Methods: Soleus gene expression of both sedentary and exercise trained HCR and LCR was characterized by microarray- and gene ontology analysis. Results: Although HCR and LCR had an inborn 347% difference in running capacity, only three genes were found differentially expressed in the soleus muscle between the two groups. Up-regulation of the mitochondrial enzyme leucyl-transferRNA synthetase (LARS2) was found in the sedentary LCR. Increased expression of LARS2 has been associated with a mitochondrial DNA mutation linked to maternally inherited diabetes and mitochondrial dysfunction. In line with our findings, a growing body of evidence suggests that LCR have compromised mitochondrial function. After exercise training, 58 genes were altered in the soleus muscle of HCR, in contrast to only one in the LCR group. This suggests that animals born with different levels of fitness respond different to the same type of exercise training. Adaptations to exercise in HCR seemed to be associated with increased lipid metabolism and fatty acid elongation in the mitochondria. Also, genes associated with the peroxisomes, seemed to be central in the adaptation to exercise. Conclusion: The results indicate that (i) LCR might have mitochondrial dysfunction, which may be a contributing factor of the low inborn aerobic capacity, (ii) animals born with different levels of fitness respond different to the same exercise program. Keywords: aerobic capacity, metabolic syndrome, soleus muscle, gene expression, metabolism

DESIGN
There are 16 samples in this study.

PLATFORM
GPL1355 [Rat230_2] Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
18780757

