TITLE
Regulation of the gonadal transcriptome during sex determination and testis morphogenesis: comparative candidate genes

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Embryonic day 13 (E13), E14, and E16 rat testes and ovaries were used for microarray analysis, as well as E13 testis organ cultures that undergo testis morphogenesis and develop seminiferous cords in vitro. A list of 109 genes resulted from a selective analysis for genes present in male gonadal development and with a 1.5-fold change in expression between E13 and E16. Characterization of these 109 genes potentially important for testis development revealed that cytoskeletal-associated proteins, extracellular matrix factors, and signaling factors were highly represented. Throughout the developmental period (E13-E16), sex-enriched transcripts were more prevalent in the male with 34 of the 109 genes having testis-enriched expression during sex determination. In ovaries, the total number of transcripts with a 1.5-fold change in expression between E13 and E16 was similar to the testis, but none of those genes were both ovary enriched and regulated during the developmental period. Genes conserved in sex determination were identified by comparing changing transcripts in the rat analysis herein, to transcripts altered in previously published mouse studies of gonadal sex determination. A comparison of changing mouse and rat transcripts identified 43 genes with species conservation in sex determination and testis development. Profiles of gene expression during E13-E16 rat testis and ovary development are presented and candidate genes for involvement in sex determination and testis differentiation are identified. Analysis of cellular pathways did not reveal any specific pathways involving multiple candidate genes. However, the genes and gene network identified influence numerous cellular processes with cellular differentiation, proliferation, focal contact, RNA localization, and development being predominant. Keywords: expression analysis, testis, ovary, sex determination

DESIGN
RNA samples from two different groups of 20-40 pooled gonads for each sample.  Embrionic testis and ovaries  of age E13, E14, or E16, and E13 testis cultured for three days were compared to each other

PLATFORM
GPL341 [RAE230A] Affymetrix Rat Expression 230A Array

CITATIONS
17709564

