TITLE
Time course gene expression profiling of T-cell (CD40L+) induced, anti-CD40-siRNA treated, HUVECs

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The CD40-CD40L dyad seems to play a prominent role fostering the immune-inflammatory response triggered by endothelial cell (EC)-T cell interaction. To comprehensively delineate the involvement of CD40 (TNFRSF5) in EC activation, we combined RNAi-mediated CD40 knock-down with comparative genome-wide transcriptional profiling of EC in response to T cell. We report the initiation of a profound stress response in ECs upon CD40-CD40L engagement through early up-regulation, among others, of the major pro-inflammatory NFkB and MAPK/SAPK pathways and their associated transcription factors. Moreover, we have identified novel genes regulated through the CD40-CD40L interaction, and pathways previously unrecognized to be induced by CD40 signaling in ECs. Thus, we document a strong down-regulation of endothelial APLN by CD40-CD40L interaction, which could lead to vascular tone dysfunction in atherosclerotic lesions. Conversely, CD40-mediated up-regulation of the viral immune surveillance system, notably TLR3, IFIH1, RIG-I, and RNASEL, establishes a reverse link from adaptive to innate immunity in ECs. Moreover, systematic enrichment analysis substantiates endothelial CD40 involvement in the transcriptional regulation of gene networks associated with adhesion and motility, immunity, cell fate control, hemostasis and metabolism. Our study also highlights the potency and specificity of CD40 siRNA mediated inhibition, and the relevance of CD40 signaling pathways for anti-inflammatory therapeutic intervention. Keywords: treated vs. untreated comparison, time course

DESIGN
Time course experiment comparing endothelial gene expression profiling of CD40-silenced versus non-silenced cultured cells using RNA interference. Two independent experiments were performed where HUVECs were siRNA-transfected and co-cultured with Jurkat D1.1 for 4, 10, 16 h and harvested for RNA extraction. Technical dye swap duplicates were performed for each of the two biological replicates in all three time points.

PLATFORM
GPL1708 Agilent-012391 Whole Human Genome Oligo Microarray G4112A (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
18669876

