TITLE
The transcriptome difference analysis after overexpression of lncRNA-smad7 in skeletal muscle damage

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been demonstrated to play important roles in skeletal muscle development. However, their regulation remains poorly understood. In the present study, to screen RNA-seq data about lncRNAs in myoblasts and myotubes, we selected a difference expression lncRNA, lncRNA-smad7. We aimed to investigate the function and molecular mechanism of lncRNA-smad7 during skeletal muscle development. Functional studies had shown that lncRNA-smad7 promoted myoblasts G1 phase arrest by flow cytometry and myoblasts differentiation by qRT-PCR, western blot and immunofluorescence in vitro. LncRNA-smad7 also promoted skeletal muscle regeneration in Cardiotoxin (CTX) induced muscle injury in vivo, which was mainly elucidated by HE staining and RNA-seq analysis, etc. Further mechanism research indicated that lncRNA-smad7 could increase smad7 and IGF2 protein expression level. Whereas, overexpression of  miR-125b inhibited smad7 and IGF2 protein expression as well as lncRNA-smad7 and smad7 3’UTR luciferase activity, which were validated with a dual luciferase report system. In summary, the functional role and molecular mechanism manifested that lncRNA-smad7 promoted myoblasts differentiation and skeletal muscle regeneration through sponging miR-125b.

DESIGN
We used RNA-seq to detect the the transcriptome difference after lncRNA-smad7 gain of function in skeletal muscle damage. Compared to control group, existing 359 differential expressed genes, 121 genes and 238 genes were upregulated or down regulated respectively . GO analysis of genes shown that lncRNA-smad7 mainly participated in biological process such as skeletal muscle tissue development, skeletal muscle organ development, et al Six skeletal muscle samples from mouse(6w) of two group, L7(lncRNA-smad7) and Control, were purchased from the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi’An, P.R. China.

PLATFORM
GPL21103 Illumina HiSeq 4000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

