TITLE
AFFYMETRIX ANALYSIS OF E9.5 RFC MOUSE KO EMBRYOS REVEALS ALTERED EXPR’N OF GENES IN THE CUBILIN-MEGALIN COMPLEX

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The reduced folate carrier (RFC1) is an integral membrane protein and facilitative anion exchanger that mediates delivery of 5-methyltetrahydrofolate into mammalian cells.  Adequate maternal-fetal transport of folate is necessary for normal embryogenesis.  Targeted inactivation of the murine RFC1 gene results in post-implantation embryo lethality, but daily folic acid supplementation of pregnant dams prolongs survival of homozygous embryos until mid-gestation.  At E10.5 RFC1-/- embryos are developmentally delayed relative to wildtype littermates, have multiple malformations, including neural tube defects, and die due to failure of chorioallantoic fusion.  The mesoderm is sparse and disorganized, and there is a marked absence of erythrocytes in yolk sac blood islands.  Affymetrix microarray analysis and quantitative RT-PCR validation of the relative gene expression profiles in E9.5 RFC1-/- vs. RFC1+/+ embryos indicates a dramatic downregulation of multiple genes involved in erythropoiesis, and upregulation of several genes that form the cubilin-megalin multiligand endocytic receptor complex.  Megalin protein expression disappears from the visceral yolk sac of RFC1-/- embryos, and cubilin protein is widely misexpressed.  Inactivation of RFC1 impacts the expression of several ligands and interacting proteins in the cubilin-amnionless-megalin complex that are involved in the maternal-fetal transport of folate, vitamin B12, and other nutrients, lipids and morphogens required for normal embryogenesis. Comparison of RFC KO, wildtype normal embryos vs. RFC KO, nullizygous affected embryos Keywords: reduced folate carrier knockout, folate receptor, cubilin, megalin, embryos, gene expression, neural tube defect, chorioallantoic fusion

DESIGN
6 samples RFC KO mouse embryos, E9.5, folic acid treated: 3 Control, Wildtype, normal; 3 Affected, Nullizygous, CR/chorioallantoic defect; as paired-littermates with one normal and one affected embryo per set from each of three separate litters for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
18400109

