TITLE
Different gene expression between Contol group, Model group and Drup(7-P) group

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Aim: To find the genes that related with the drug's(7-P) function. Design: 36 Rats were randomly divided into three group:control group(12), model group(12) and drug group(12). At last, randomly choosing 3 Rat from each group to do genechip analysis. In model group, the  Porcine serum was given intraperitoneally (i.p.)  to rats in a volume of 1.5 mL/kg every 3 days for a total of 20 treatments.  Effect on model animals was confirmed by liver histology and biochemical assays . In drug group, 7-P was dissolved in balanced saline solution for administration subcutaneously at dosages of 174 μg/kg in a volume of 1 mL/kg.  The doses were given 15 times, one day interval. In control group, the animals were not treated with porcine serum. but given an equal volume of vehicle alone. During 7-P and vehicle administration, porcine serum was given intraperitoneally (i.p.) to rats in a volume of 1.5 mL/ kg once weekly.  All animals were fasted for 24 h before porcine serum treatment. Background: During investigation of hypervariable region 1 (HVR1) of hepatitis C virus (HCV), a seven amino acids mimic peptide named 7-P was identified within the N-terminal of HVR1 that could induce IFN-γ and IL-10 expression while decreasing the expression of TNF-α in vivo and in vitro. Further studies revealed that 7-P could not only decrease the serum levels of aminotransferases (ALT, AST), alkaline phosphatase (AKP), and billirubin, but were also effective in reversing histopathological evidence of inflammation-mediated hepatic injury in 3 rat models.  The protective mechanism and gene expression profiles were investigated in detail in a rat chronic liver injury model using Affymetrix microarrays . Conclusion: We found that IL-1β, tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily 14 (TNFRSF14), intercellular adhesion molecule 2 (ICAM2), sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1 (SREBP 1), Prohibitin (PHB), and inhibitor of DNA binding 2 (Id2) were the target genes that related with 7-P Keywords: comparative genomic hybridization

DESIGN
36 Rats were randomly divided into three group:control group(12), model group(12) and drug group(12). At last, randomly choosing 3 Rat from each group to do genechip analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL1355 [Rat230_2] Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

