TITLE
Genome-wide analysis of gene expression by IFNβ in Transformed HMEC (Epithelial/non-CSC, Mesenchymal/CSC)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC), the deadliest form of this disease, lacks a targeted therapy. TNBC tumors that fail to respond to chemotherapy are characterized by a repressed Interferon/Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (IFN/STAT) gene signature and are often enriched for Cancer Stem Cells (CSCs). We have found that human mammary epithelial cells that undergo an Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) following transformation acquire CSC properties. These mesenchymal/CSCs have a significantly repressed IFN/STAT gene expression signature and an enhanced ability to migrate and form tumor spheres. Treatment with Interferon-Beta (IFNb) led to a less aggressive epithelial/non-CSC-like state, with repressed expression of mesenchymal proteins (VIMENTIN, SLUG), reduced migration and tumor sphere formation, and re-expression of CD24 (a surface marker for non-CSCs), concomitant with an epithelial-like morphology. The CSC-like properties were correlated with high levels of unphosphorylated Interferon Stimulated Gene Factor 3 (U-ISGF3), which was previously linked to resistance to DNA damage. Inhibiting the expression of IRF9 (the DNA-binding component of U-ISGF3) reduced the migration of mesenchymal/CSCs. Here we report a positive translational role for IFNb as gene expression profiling of patient derived TNBC tumors demonstrates that an IFNb Metagene signature correlates with improved patient survival, an immune response linked with Tumor Infiltrating Lymphocytes (TILs) and a repressed CSC Metagene signature. Taken together, our findings indicate that repressed IFN signaling in TNBCs with CSC-like properties is due to high levels of U-ISGF3, and that treatment with IFNb reduces CSC properties, suggesting a novel therapeutic strategy to treat drug-resistant, highly aggressive TNBC tumors.

DESIGN
Total RNA was obtained from Transformed HMEC (Ep/non-CSC, MES/CSC) treated with IFNβ for 4h or 96hr or untreated for 0h or 96h

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

