TITLE
Wnt ligands 3a and 5a regulate proliferation and migration in human fetal liver progenitor cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Since human fetal liver progenitor cells (hFLPC) can differentiate into multiple liver cell types in vitro and in vivo, hFLPC may be a suitable source for cell therapy and regeneration strategies. Imperative for effective clinical applications of hFLPC is the enhanced knowledge of growth factors that mediate and improve migration and proliferation. The canonical wingless/int-1 (Wnt) signal transduction pathway is known to play a key role in proliferation and migration of stem cells. So, we investigated a role for Wnt3a and Wnt5a ligands in regulating the proliferation and migration of hFLPC. We used alamarBlue assay and transwell migration assay and examined proliferation and migration of hFLPC to Wnt3a and Wnt5a. In addition, the target genes of Wnt signal transduction pathway was identified using microarray analysis and validated by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR).  We found that Wnt3a or Wnt5a independently significantly increased migration and proliferation in a dose-dependent manner which was significantly inhibited by Wnt inhibitors Wnt-C59 or KN-62. Addition of Wnt3a to hFLPC resulted in increased mRNA expression of the known Wnt target genes Axin-2, DKK2, while Wnt5a increased CXCR7, all of which are closely associated with an enhanced proliferation capacity of stem cells.  Thus, we report that Wnt3a and Wnt5a may play an important role in the proliferation and migration of hFLPC by possibly regulating key target genes-involved in these processes. Incorporating recombinant human Wnt3a and Wnt5a in regenerative strategies using liver stem/progenitor cells might improve the process of liver regeneration.

DESIGN
Examination of Wnt ligands 3a and 5a induced gene expression changes in SV40LT-HFL cells and human fetal liver  progenitor cells. In total 18 samples were analyzed in two different cell lines treated with control, Wnt3a or Wnt5a. Each group contained three replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL17692 [HuGene-2_1-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 2.1 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

