TITLE
Differential Role of NKG2D in Recognition and Killing of Hepatic Lineage Cells Derived from Embryonic Stem Cells and Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Recent advances towards the efficient and reproducible differentiation of stem cells into hepatocyte-like cells (HLC) have created potential opportunities in clinical transplantation. For this approach to be successfully translated, however, it is necessary to understand the immune response to stem cell-derived cellular products. Whereas both embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells have been utilized as cellular sources for differentiation and lineage specification, their relative ability to be recognized by immune effector cells is unclear. Here we determine the expression of immune recognition molecules on HLC generated from murine embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells, compared to adult hepatocytes, and we evaluate the impact on recognition by NK cells. We report that HLC lack MHC class I expression, and that embryonic stem cell derived-HLC have higher expression of the NK cell activating ligands Rae1, H60, and Mult1 than induced pluripotent stem cell-derived HLC and adult hepatocytes. Moreover, the lack of MHC class I render embryonic stem cell derived-HLC, and induced pluripotent stem cell derived-HLC, susceptible to killing by syngeneic and allogeneic NK cells.  Both embryonic stem cell derived-HLC, and induced pluripotent stem cell derived-HLC, are killed by NK cells at higher levels than adult hepatocytes. Finally, we demonstrate that the NK cell activation receptor, NKG2D, plays a key role in NK cell killing of embryonic stem cell derived-HLC, but not induced pluripotent stem cell-derived HLC. Hepatocytes were isolated from FVB/NJ mice and C57Bl/6 mice using a modification of the Seglen’s perfusion technique.

DESIGN
Undifferentiated embryonic stem cells ESC (n=4), Adult Hepatocytes (AD-Hep) (n = 3), mESC differentiated into hepatocyte like cells (n =3).

PLATFORM
GPL16570 [MoGene-2_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 2.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

