TITLE
Altered gene expression in the brain and liver of female fathead minnows exposed to fadrozole

ORGANISM
Pimephales promelas

SUMMARY
The fathead minnow (Pimephales promelas) is a small fish species widely used for ecotoxicology research and regulatory testing in North America.  This study used a 2000 gene oligonucleotide microarray to evaluate the effects of the aromatase inhibitor, fadrozole, on gene expression in the liver and brain tissue of exposed females.  Reproductive measures, plasma vitellogenin, and gene expression data for the brain isoform of aromatase (CYP19B), vitellogenin precursors, and transferrin all provided evidence supporting the efficacy of the fadrozole exposure.  Unsupervised analysis of the microarray results identified 20 genes in brain and 41 in liver as significantly up-regulated and 7 genes in brain and around 45 in liver as significantly down-regulated.  Differentially expressed genes were associated with a broad spectrum of biological functions, many with no obvious relationship to aromatase inhibition.  However, in brain, fadrozole exposure elicited significant up-regulation of several genes involved in the cholesterol synthesis, suggesting it as one potentially impacted pathway.  Gene ontology-based analysis of expression changes in liver suggested overall down-regulation of protein biosynthesis.  While real-time PCR analyses supported some of the microarray responses, others could not be verified.  Overall, results of this study provide a foundation for developing novel hypotheses regarding the system-wide effects of fadrozole, and other chemical stressors with similar modes of action, on fish biology. Keywords: chemical stress response

DESIGN
--Fadrozole exposure-- Treatments:  0, 60 ug fadrozole/L Replication:  4 replicate tanks per treatment, 2 replicate pairs (1 male, one female per pair) per tank for a total of 8 male, 8 female per treatment. Route of exposure:  Waterborne, continuous flow through, without the use of carrier solvents, flow rate approx. 45 ml/min. Tanks:  20 L tanks containing 10 L of exposure water Fadrozole (purity ≥ 99%; Dr. H. Cooper Eckhardt, Summit, NJ, USA). Fish:  Adult (ca. 6 month old) male (4.65±0.93 g) and female (1.90±0.44 g) Conditions:  (25°C, 16:8 light:dark photoperiod, fed adult brine shrimp twice daily) Duration: 7 d (± 4 h) Sampling:  Fish humanely euthanized in tricaine methanesulfonate (Finquel; Argent, Redmond, WA, USA).  Liver, and brain samples transferred directly to pre-weighed vials of RNAlater® (Sigma, St. Louis, MO).  Plasma samples were stored frozen at -80°C. Average water quality characteristics (±SD):  temperature 25.5±0.1 °C; pH 7.21±0.04; dissolved oxygen 5.74±0.52 mg/L. --Microarray analysis-- n=3 microarrays per treatment and tissue Experimental samples:  total RNA pooled from n=2 fish from the same treatment and replicate (except for pooled sample BC3 which included fish from two different replicate tanks). Reference sample:  pooled liver, brain, and gonad samples from adult male and female fathead minnows Microarray design:  Two color, reference design Hybridization:  Experimental samples Cy5, reference sample Cy3

PLATFORM
GPL6516 US EPA Ecoarray FHM Pimephales promelas 10K 2000 gene (pilot) array

CITATIONS
18497826

