TITLE
Primary constitutional MLH1 epimutations: a focal epigenetic event [blood data sets]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Constitutional MLH1 epimutations are characterized by monoallelic methylation of the MLH1 promoter throughout normal tissues, accompanied by allele-specific silencing. The mechanism underlying primary MLH1 epimutations is currently unknown. The aim of this study was to perform an in-depth characterization of constitutional MLH1 epimutations targeting the aberrantly methylated region around MLH1 and other genomic loci. Methods: Twelve MLH1 epimutation carriers, 61 Lynch syndrome patients and 41 healthy controls, were analyzed by Infinium Human Methylation 450K beadchip, and targeted molecular techniques were used to characterize the MLH1 epimutation in carriers and their inheritance pattern. Results: No nucleotide or structural variants were identified in-cis on the epimutated allele in ten carriers, in which intergenerational methylation erasure was demonstrated in two, suggesting primary type of epimutation. CNVs outside the MLH1 locus were found in two cases. EPM2AIP1-MLH1 CpG island was identified as the sole differentially methylated region in MLH1 epimutation carriers compared to controls. Conclusion: Primary constitutional MLH1 epimutations arise as a focal epigenetic event at the EPM2AIP1-MLH1 CpG island in the absence of cis-acting genetic variants. Further molecular characterization is needed to elucidate the mechanistic basis of MLH1 epimutations and their heritability/reversibility.

DESIGN
12 MLH1 epimutation carriers, 61 Lynch syndrome patients and 41 healthy controls were analyzed by Infinium Human Methylation 450k Beadchip. From all included individuals, DNA from blood was collected. FFPE blocks of normal colorectal mucosa and colorectal cancer tissue were also included when available. The current subset includes only blood samples. FFPE samples can be found in the other associated dataset from Damaso et al. (British Journal of Cancer).

PLATFORM
GPL13534 Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (HumanMethylation450_15017482)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

