TITLE
The role of macrophage Socs3 in the pathogenesis of aortic dissection

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background—Aortic dissection (AD) is a life-threatening medical emergency caused by the abrupt destruction of the intimomedial layer of the aortic walls. As previous studies have reported the involvement of proinflammatory cytokine IL-6 in AD pathogenesis, we investigated the role of Stat3 signaling, a downstream pathway of IL-6 in macrophages in pathogenesis of AD. Methods and Results—We characterized the pathological and molecular events triggered by aortic stress, which can lead to AD. Aortic stress on the suprarenal aorta due to infrarenal aorta stiffening and angiotensin II infusion for 1 week caused focal medial rupture at the branching point of the celiac trunk and superior mesenteric artery. This focal medial rupture in 6 weeks in wild type (WT) mice but progressed to AD in mice with macrophage-specific deletion of Socs3 gene (mSocs3-KO). mSocs3-KO mice showed premature activation of cell proliferation, an inflammatory response, and skewed differentiation of macrophages toward the tissue-destructive phenotype. Concomitantly, they showed aberrant phenotypic modulation of SMCs and TGFβ signaling, which are likely to participate in tissue repair. Human AD samples revealed STAT3 activation in adventitial macrophages adjacent to the site of tissue destruction. Conclusions—These findings suggest that AD development is preceded by focal medial rupture, in which macrophage Socs3 maintains proper inflammatory response and differentiation of SMCs, thus promoting fibrotic healing to prevent tissue destruction and AD development. Understanding the sequence of the pathological and molecular events preceding AD development will help predict and prevent AD development and progression.

DESIGN
Gene expressions in suprarenal aorta of mice were analyzed in aortic stress model that was induced by 0.5 M CaCl2 application to infrarenal aorta and continuous infusion of angiotensin II (1 microgram/kg/min). Mice were either wild type (WT) or with macrophage-specific deletion of Socs3 gene (KO). All data were compared to WT aorta without intervention (WT_preOPcontrol).

PLATFORM
GPL10787 Agilent-028005 SurePrint G3 Mouse GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

