TITLE
The molecular basis of T-PLL is a TCL1/ATM-centered concept of aberrant but actionable damage responses [III]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia (T-PLL) is a rare and poor-prognostic mature T-cell malignancy. To address its incomplete molecular concept, we integrated large-scale profiling data of alterations in gene expression, allelic copy number (CN), and nucleotide sequences in 111 well-characterized patients. Besides prominent signatures of T-cell activation and prevalent clonal variants, we also identified novel hot-spots for CN variability, fusion molecules, alternative transcripts, and progression-associated dynamics. The overall lesional spectrum of T-PLL is mainly annotated to axes of DNA damage responses, T-cell receptor / cytokine signaling, and histone modulation. We formulate a multi-dimensional model of T-PLL pathogenesis centered around a unique combination of TCL1 overexpression with damaging ATM aberrations as initiating core lesions. The effects imposed by TCL1 cooperate with compromised ATM towards a leukemogenic phenotype of impaired DNA damage processing. Dysfunctional ATM appears inefficient in alleviating elevated redox burdens and telomere attrition and in evoking a p53-dependent apoptotic response to genotoxic insults. As non-genotoxic strategies, synergistic combinations of p53 reactivators and deacetylase inhibitors reinstate such cell death execution.

DESIGN
Purified T-cells from 98 T-PLL patients (Supplementary Data1 for additional information) were analyzed using various high-throughput profiling platforms (overlap indicated): Affymetrix SNP 6.0 arrays (n=83 cases) for analysis of somatic copy-number alterations (sCNAs). For sCNA profiling patient-derived germline control DNA from 13 t/g pairs of the 83 cases) were used as a pooled reference alone or in combination with publically available HapMap data sets ( http://hapmap.ncbi.nlm. nih.gov/).

PLATFORM
GPL6801 [GenomeWideSNP_6] Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP 6.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

