TITLE
Evaluation of immunological factors involved in initiation of chronic brucellosis in CD4+ T cells using miRNA array

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Brucellosis is a serious infectious disease and continues to be an important cause of morbidity. It can be seen almost anywhere in the world and at any age. Acute phase heals or becomes chronic form. Infection of 10-30% of patients becomes chronic, despite early diagnosis and treatment.  Although our knowledge about Brucella virulence factors and the host response increase rapidly, how they can hidden from the immune system and cause chronic disease are still unknown. We aimed to investigate the immunological factors which belong to CD4+ T cells and their roles in the transition of brucellosis from acute to chronic infection. Using miRNA microarray, more than 2000 miRNAs were screened in CD4 + T cells of patients with acute or chronic brucellosis and healthy controls that were sorted from peripheral blood with flow cytometry and validated by RT-qPCR.  Findings were evaluated using GeneSpring GX (Agilent) 13.0 software and KEGG pathway analysis. In comparison to acute cases, expression levels of 28 miRNAs were significantly altered in chronic cases. All of miRNAs were up-regulated in chronic cases in comparison with the control group. Apart from a miRNA (miR-4649-3p), 27 miRNAs were not expressed in the acute cases (p < 0.05, fold change > 2).  These miRNAs have the potential to be markers for chronic cases. The differential expressed miRNAs and their predicted target genes that involved in previously MAPK signaling pathway, regulation of actin cytoskeleton, endocytosis, and protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum indicating their potential roles in chronic brucellosis and its progression. It is the first study of miRNA expression analyzes of human CD4+ T cells to clarify the mechanism of inveteracy in brucellosis.

DESIGN
Using miRNA microarray, more than 2000 miRNAs were screened in CD4 + T cells of patients with acute or chronic brucellosis and healthy controls that were sorted from peripheral blood with flow cytometry and validated through qRT-PCR.  Findings were evaluated using GeneSpring GX (Agilent) 13.0 software and KEGG pathway analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL19730 Agilent-046064 Unrestricted_Human_miRNA_V19.0_Microarray (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

