TITLE
Single Cell RNA Sequencing Analysis of Mouse E14.5 Fetal Liver Runx1 P2-hCD4 plus and minus MEPs and CMPs

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
In recent years, highly detailed characterization of adult bone marrow (BM) myeloid progenitors has been achieved and, as a result, the impact of somatic defects on different hematopoietic lineage fate decisions can be precisely determined.  Fetal liver (FL) hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) are poorly characterized in comparison, potentially hindering the study of the impact of genetic alterations on midgestation hematopoiesis.  Numerous disorders, for example infant acute leukaemias, have in utero origins and their study would therefore benefit from the ability to isolate highly purified progenitor subsets.  We previously demonstrated that a Runx1 distal promoter (P1)-GFP::proximal promoter (P2)-hCD4 dual-reporter mouse (Mus musculus) model can be used to identify adult BM progenitor subsets with distinct lineage preferences.  In this study, we undertook the characterization of the expression of Runx1-P1-GFP and P2-hCD4 in FL.  Expression of P2-hCD4 in the FL immunophenotypic Megakaryocyte-Erythroid Progenitor (MEP) and Common Myeloid Progenitor (CMP) compartments corresponded to increased granulocytic/monocytic/megakaryocytic and decreased erythroid specification.  Moreover, Runx1-P2-hCD4 expression correlated with several endogenous cell surface markers’ expression, including CD31 and CD45, providing a new strategy for prospective identification of highly purified fetal myeloid progenitors in transgenic mouse models.  We utilized this methodology to compare the impact of the deletion of either total RUNX1 or RUNX1C alone and to determine the fetal HPCs lineages most substantially affected.  This new prospective identification of FL progenitors therefore raises the prospect of identifying the underlying gene networks responsible with greater precision than previously possible.

DESIGN
mRNA profiles of single sorted Runx1 P2-hCD4+ Megakaryocyte Erythroid Progenitors (MEPs), Runx1 P2-hCD4- MEPs, Runx1 P2-hCD4+ Common Myeloid Progenitors (CMPs) and Runx1 P2-hCD4- CMPs from Mouse E14.5 Runx1 P2-GFP::P2-hCD4/+ Fetal Liver Samples

PLATFORM
GPL19057 Illumina NextSeq 500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

