TITLE
Novel Targeting of Transcription and Metabolism in Glioblastoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Purpose: Glioblastoma (GBM) is highly resistant to treatment, largely due to disease heterogeneity and resistance mechanisms. We sought to investigate a promising drug that can inhibit multiple aspects of cancer cell survival mechanisms and become effective therapeutics for GBM patients. Experimental Design: To investigate TG02, an agent with known penetration of the Blood-Brain Barrier, we examined the effects as single agent and in combination with temozolomide, a commonly used chemotherapy in GBM. We utilized human GBM cells and a syngeneic mouse orthotopic GBM model, evaluating survival and the pharmacodynamics of TG02.  Mechanistic studies included TG02-induced transcriptional regulation, apoptosis and RNA sequencing in treated GBM cells as well as the investigation of mitochondrial and glycolytic function assays. Results: We demonstrated that TG02 inhibited cell proliferation, induced cell death, and synergized with temozolomide in GBM cells with different genetic background but not in astrocytes. TG02-induced cytotoxicity was blocked by the overexpression of phosphorylated CDK9, suggesting a CDK9-dependent cell killing. TG02 suppressed transcriptional progression of anti-apoptotic proteins, and induced apoptosis in GBM cells. We further demonstrated that TG02 caused mitochondrial dysfunction and glycolytic suppression and ultimately ATP depletion in GBM. A prolonged survival was observed in GBM mice receiving combined treatment of TG02 and temozolomide. The TG02-induced decrease of CDK9 phosphorylation was confirmed in the brain tumor tissue. Conclusions: TG02 inhibits multiple survival mechanisms and synergistically decreases energy production with temozolomide, representing a promising therapeutic strategy in GBM, currently under investigation in an ongoing clinical trial.

DESIGN
The RNA sequencing was carried out to analyze the profile of RNA expression following 0.1% of DMSO (control), TG02, TMZ, and TG02/TMZ treatment, in duplicate, in GSC923 cells.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

