TITLE
Renal gene expression during postnatal development in growth restricted rats depends on the cause of previous intrauterine deficiency

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Aim: kidney development is a tigthly controlled process. Changes in gene expression during critical development steps lead to significantly altered outcome. This study was designed to clarify whether there are specifically altered gene expression networks after different intrauterine deficiencies Results: Kidney weights were significantly reduced in LIG and LP but not in IUS pups, whereas kidney weight to body weight ratio was significantly reduced in LP only. In all groups, significant novel transcriptional alterations were identified and linked to active inflammation and hematopoiesis in group LIG on PND 1, tubular dysfunction in LIG on PND 7, tubular, glomerular and vascular development and overall transcriptional regulation in IUS on PND 7, and steroid- and PPAR- dependent metabolism in LP and PND 7. Conclusion: Different experimental intrauterine deficiencies specifically modify renal gene expression during postnatal kidney development, which may contribute to different renal long term sequelae. Our study suggests that future perinatal interventions to prevent programmed kidney disease after IUGR should aim at specific targets depending on the cause of IUGR.

DESIGN
Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) was induced in rats either by (1) uteroplacental insufficiency after bilateral uterine vessel ligation (LIG) or (2) intrauterine stres (IUS) after sham operation of the dam on gestational day 19, or (3) low protein (LP) diet throughout pregnancy. Offspring of unimpaired dams served as controls. Renal gene expression was longitudinally examined in male pups by whole gene transcriptome microarrays on postnatal days (PND) 1 and 7. Principal component, basic molecule, upstream regulator (Ingenuity) and STRING analyses were applied.

PLATFORM
GPL17117 [RaGene-2_0-st] Affymetrix Rat Gene 2.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

