TITLE
Transcriptome analysis of the biosynthesis of anthocyanins in Begonia semperflorens under low-temperature and high-light conditions

ORGANISM
Begonia x semperflorens-cultorum

SUMMARY
Anthocyanins are considered as a stress indicator due to their involvement in the response to many stresses including high light (HL) and low temperature (LT). With the development of transcriptomics, it is necessary to find the different and common points in the mechanisms of LT-induced and HL-induced anthocyanin biosynthesis . In the present study, we determined the transcriptomes of Begonia semperflorens leaves under three different conditions (CK, HL and LT). To validate the DEGs, we selected four core genes involved in anthocyanin biosynthesis to perform RT-qPCR, and then determined anthocyanin content. In total, 94,880 unigenes with a mean length of 635 bp were assembled. The N50 values of the transcripts and unigenes were 2,286 bp and 1,064 bp, respectively. The functional annotations of the unigenes were analysed against five protein databases. DEGs related to anthocyanin biosynthesis, transportation and regulation were identified. We also analysis the enrichment pathway, and discuss the difference in mechanisms of anthocyanin induced under low-emperature and high-light conditions. This study is the first to examine broad-scale gene expression in B. semperflorens. By identifying DEGs regulated by both LT and HL conditions, we found that anthocyanin accumulation was employed as a common strategy by Begonia seedlings in resisting LT and HL stress. By identifying DEGs regulated differently by LT and HL conditions, we found that Begonia seedlings also had some different strategies for resisting LT and HL stresses: anthocyanins were biosynthesized under HL condition, while lignin, proanthocyanidins and anthocyanins under LT condition.

DESIGN
The four parallel samples of each treatment were then mixed together as each treatment sample. A leaf sample of at least 0.3 g was prepared from each sample, immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at -80°C for RNA extraction.

PLATFORM
GPL24348 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Begonia x semperflorens-cultorum)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
