TITLE
Stochastic gain of susceptibility identifies a novel mechanism of resistance to hybrid dysgenesis in Drosophila virilis

ORGANISM
Drosophila virilis

SUMMARY
Syndromes of hybrid dysgenesis (HD) have been critical for our understanding of the transgenerational maintenance of genome stability by piRNA. Classic syndromes of HD in D. melanogaster are explained by the germline activation of paternally inherited P or I-elements in the absence of maternal piRNA. On the other hand, HD in D. virilis represents a special case since it includes simultaneous mobilization of a set of TEs including Penelope, Paris, Helena and Polyphemus belonging to different classes. Previous studies have suggested that this is due to the mass action of a large number of different families that are paternally inherited from an inducer strain, but are in very low abundance in the female germline of the responder (M-like) strain. The standard explanation for this is that eggs of the responder strains lack an abundant pool of piRNAs corresponding to the TE families transmitted by sperm. However, a recent population survey of resistance to paternal induction of HD has called this explanation into question. This is because there are several D. virilis strains lacking the above TEs in their genomes, but exhibit a “neutral” (N) cytotype that confers resistance to HD. To characterize the mechanism of resistance to HD in strains of various origin, we performed a comparative analysis of the landscape of ovarian small RNAs in strains that vary in their resistance to HD mediated sterility. Overall, we demonstrate that resistance to HD cannot be solely explained by a maternal piRNA pool that matches the assemblage of TEs that likely cause HD. In support of this, we have witnessed a cytotype shift (from N to M) in a strain devoid of all major TEs implicated in HD without significant changes in their copy number or expression of piRNAs homologous to asymmetric TEs. Instead, this shift in cytotype is associated with a change in the epigenetic profile of repeat sequences unlikely to be causative of paternal induction. Overall, our data suggest that resistance to TE-mediated sterility during HD may be achieved by a novel mechanism that is distinct from the canonical syndromes of HD.

DESIGN
Deep-sequencing of ovarian small RNA from parental strains and the dysgenic and reciprocal crosses.

PLATFORM
GPL15873 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Drosophila virilis) GPL20240 Illumina NextSeq 500 (Drosophila virilis)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

