TITLE
Dysregulated mRNA and miRNA expression networks in Helicobacter pylori infected gastric epithelial cell line,  AGS (miRNA)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
We performed genome-wide mRNA and miRNA expression analysis in gastric epithelial cell line AGS infected with Helicobacter pylori at 100 Multiplicity of Infection (MOI), comparing the expression profile of infected cells with uninfected cells. Differentially expressed mRNAs and miRNAs were identified, which showed a 1.5 fold change in expression in infected cells compared to uninfected cells. We performed in silico analysis of miRNA-mRNA target interactions among the inversely correlated differentially expressed miRNAs and mRNAs, and performed functional enrichment analysis of the target genes, to identify important cellular pathways that reflect the patho-biology of H. pylori infected cells. Among the important miRNA-mRNA target pairs, PHLPP1, reported to be associated with poor prognosis in cancer, was predicted to be a putative target of miR-29b-1-5p. Therefore, we focused on the miR-29b-1-5p/PHLPP1 miRNA/target pair for detailed investigation into their role in H. pylori-mediated signalling in gastric epithelial cells. This study demonstrates that an integrated analysis of global mRNA and miRNA expression patterns, combined with miRNA-mRNA target prediction and functional analysis of miRNA target genes can yield an understanding of the critical pathways regulating the behaviour of gastric epithelial cells challenged with H. pylori.

DESIGN
AGS cells (human gastric epithelial cell line) were infected with H. pylori 26695 at 100 MOI for 4 h.Total RNAs were isolated from both AGS cells infected with H. pylori (2 samples) and uninfected AGS cells (2 samples).Total RNA for each sample was sent to Genotypic for further processing.

PLATFORM
GPL15018 Agilent-031181 Unrestricted_Human_miRNA_V16.0_Microarray 030840 (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

