TITLE
Next generation sequencing analysis of gene expression profiles in splenic CD4+ T cells from EAE mice treated with TRAIL

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Purpose: To elucidate the potential immune-regulatory mechanism of TRAIL of activated T cells in EAE, we analyzed gene expression profiles of splenic CD4+ T cells from EAE mice treated with TRAIL by RNA sequencing and transcriptome analysis. Methods: Splenic CD4+ T cell mRNA profiles of control or EAE mice treated with vehicle or TRAIL were generated by deep sequencing using Illumina Solexa. Library construction of all samples were used by Agilent's SureSelect Strand Specific RNA Library Preparation Kit for 75SE (Single-End or Paired-End) sequencing on Solexa platform. The sequence was directly determined using sequencing-by-synthesis technology via the TruSeq SBS Kit. Raw sequences were obtained from the Illumina Pipeline software bcl2fastq v2.0 and expected to generate  20M  (million reads or Gb) per sample. Results: By comparing mRNA exression of splenic CD4+ T cells from EAE mice treated with vehicle or TRAIL, there were 244 genes significantly differentially expressed. By analyzing these 244 significant genes categorized by a Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis, the most significantly enriched category for CD4+ T cells was “cell cycle” (multiple of enrichment: 3.13, p = 1.64 × 10−5) followed by “TCR signaling pathway” (multiple of enrichment: 2.80, p = 8.25 × 10−4). In addition, significant genes in the“TCR signaling pathway” tended to be downregulated while those in “cell cycle”tended to be upregulated in a volcano plot analysis. Consistent with the volcano plot results, by using unsupervised hierarchical clustering, the heatmap showed that significant TCR signaling pathway-associated genes were downregulated, while significant cell cycle-associated genes were upregulated in splenic CD4+ T cells from EAE mice treated with TRAIL Conclusions: Our study demonstrated the gene transcription pattern from CD4+ T cells of TRAIL-treated EAE mice were involved in distinct TCR signaling and cell cycle pathways.

DESIGN
Splenic CD4+ T cell mRNA profiles of control or EAE mice treated with vehicle or TRAIL were generated by deep sequencing using Illumina Solexa.

PLATFORM
GPL19057 Illumina NextSeq 500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

