TITLE
Effects of trans-10, cis-12-Conjugated Linoleic Acid on Hepatic Gene Expression in a Polygenic Obese Line of Mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The trans-10, cis-12-isomer of conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) causes a rapid reduction of body and adipose mass in mice by decreasing adipocyte size and number. In addition to changes in adipose tissue, numerous studies have reported alterations in hepatic lipid metabolism. Livers of CLA fed mice gain mass due to lipid accumulation; however, the precise molecular mechanisms are unknown. To elucidate these mechanisms, we examined fatty acid composition and gene expression profiles of livers from a polygenic obese line of mice fed 1% trans-10, cis-12 CLA. Following examination of the fatty acid profile it was concluded that stearoyl CoA desaturase (SCD) activity was unaffected by CLA. Analysis of gene expression data led to the identification of 1393 genes differentially expressed in the liver of CLA fed mice at a nominal P-value of 0.01 and 775 were considered significant using a false discovery rate threshold of 0.05. Following Bonferroni correction and excluding lowly expressed transcripts, 198 genes were identified as being differentially expressed with 17 genes having ≥ 2-fold change. Pathway analysis of the 775 genes considered significant using FDR found that 38 of these genes are controlled by Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4α, a transcription factor thought to be important in controlling liver metabolic status. Keywords: obesity, conjugated linoleic acid, polygenic obese mice, liver, lipid metabolism The list of significant differentially expressed genes found in the liver of mice fed CLA vs. LA is linked below as a supplementary file.

DESIGN
Functional genomic analysis of liver tissue extracted from polygenic obese male mice fed either a control (1% linoleic acid) or treatment (1% trans 10, cis 12 conjugated linoleic acid) diet after fourteen days. Four or five mice were pooled for each labeling. There is 1 replicate for each experiment, for a total of 4 microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL891 Agilent-011978 Mouse Microarray G4121A (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

