TITLE
Differentially expressed genes in blood of BPD and Normal preterm neonates [mRNA]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is the major cause of chronic lung disease (CLD) and morbidity in preterm infants, which characterized by impaired pulmonary alveolar development in preterm infants. There is increasing evidence that micro RNA (miRNA) has a close association with the development of pulmonary diseasesincluding lung growth, pulmonary fibrosis, pneumonia, etc. The potential role of miRNA in the pathogenesis of BPD is unclear. This study aims to clarify the role of adrenomedullin (ADM) regulated by miRNA-547-3p during the process of BPD and illustrate the protective effect of ADM involved in preterm infants.We indentified the differential expressed miRNA and their potential target genes, microarray analysis using Agilent Human 4x44K Gene Expression Microarrays v2 and miRCURY LNA™ microRNA Array was performed. The results of miRNA chip were scanned by Axon GenePix 4000B and the signal of probes were read by GenePix Pro 6.0 software. Only the target genes which exist in both two databases and having different expression trend were remained. Thus, miRNA-574-3p and it’s target gene ADM were selected to do the further research in our study. And we verified miRNA-574-3p and ADM expression in BPD premature infants by realtime q-PCR. After the microarray expression analysis, there were 516 probes differential expressed between BPD samples and normal samples. Among them, 510 were up-regulated and 213 were down-regulated. Meanwhile, to the miRNA aspect, there were 37 up-regulated and 44 down-regulated. After text mining, we found ADM was already found play a role in BPD. ADM is an endogenous peptide with potent angiogenic, anti-oxidant, and anti-inflammatory properties. Realtime q-PCR assay results showed that, miRNA-574-3p expression level in blood samples from preterm infants with BPD was significantly decreased, ADM expression level in blood samples from preterm infants with BPD was significantly increased. In our study, we found that up-regulation of ADM regulated by miRNA-574-3p could protect preterm infants with BPD. These data provide novel insights into ADM regulated by miRNA-574-3p which may be shed light on BPD prevention and treatment.

DESIGN
The differential expressed genes in in blood of BPD and Normal preterm neonates were measured. Five independent experiments were performed using different donors for each experiment.

PLATFORM
GPL13497 Agilent-026652 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K v2 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T

