TITLE
Community composition of nitrous oxide related genes and their relationship to nitrogen cycling rates in salt marsh sediments

ORGANISM
synthetic construct ; sediment metagenome

SUMMARY
Salt marshes provide many key ecosystem services that have tremendous ecological and economic value. One critical service is the removal of fixed nitrogen from coastal waters, which limits the negative effects of eutrophication resulting from increased nutrient supply. Nutrient enrichment of salt marsh sediments results in higher rates of nitrogen cycling and, commonly, a concurrent increase in the flux of nitrous oxide, an important greenhouse gas. Little is known, however, regarding controls on the microbial communities that contribute to nitrous oxide fluxes in marsh sediments. To address this disconnect, we generated microbial community profiles as well as directly assayed nitrogen cycling genes that encode the enzymes responsible for overall nitrous oxide flux from salt marsh sediments. We hypothesized that communities of microbes responsible for nitrogen transformations will be structured by nitrogen availability. Taxa that respond positively to high nitrogen inputs may be responsible for the elevated rates of nitrogen cycling processes measured in fertilized sediments.  Our data show that, with the exception of ammonia-oxidizing archaea, the community composition of organisms responsible for production and consumption of nitrous oxide was altered under nutrient enrichment. These results suggest that elevated rates of nitrous oxide production and consumption are the result of changes in community structure, not simply changes in microbial activity.

DESIGN
Two color array (Cy3 and Cy5): the universal standard 20-mer oligo (custom-synthesized by IDT; 5'-\5Cy5\GTACTACTAGCCTAGGCTAG-3') is printed to the slide with a 70-mer oligo (an archetype).  Environmental DNA sequences (fluoresced with Cy3) within 15% identity of the 70-mer conjugated to a 20-mer oligo (fluoresced with Cy5) complementary to the universal standard will bind to the oligo probes on the array.  Signal is the ratio of Cy3 to Cy5. Two replicate probes were printed for each archetype. Two replicate arrays were run on duplicate targets.

PLATFORM
GPL24484 Bowen BC016 oligo array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

