TITLE
IL-1B signaling in dendritic cells induces antiviral interferon responses

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Activation of interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) responses is critical for control of viral infection.  We recently identified that stimulation of the NLRP3 inflammasome and mobilization of the inflammatory cytokine IL-1β act as critical host restrictive pathways against West Nile virus (WNV) in a mechanism dependent on the regulation of ISGs. In order to define the mechanism by which IL-1β regulates these antiviral immune programs, we utilized global transcriptome analysis in myeloid cells, known targets of WNV replication to define gene signatures required for IL-1β driven antiviral responses. Surprisingly, we found IL-1β dependent activation of interferon-beta (IFN-β) and ISGs at late times following IL-1β treatment. Expression of these antiviral innate immune genes was found to be dependent on activation of IRF3 and appears to reflect a general shift in IL-1β signaling from an inflammatory response early following treatment to an anti-inflammatory type-I IFN mediated response at later times post-treatment. These data demonstrate that inflammatory and antiviral signals integrate to control viral infection. Strategies to co-opt these cytokine activated antiviral signatures can act as novel targeted therapeutic strategies tailored specifically to individual pathogens.

DESIGN
WT or IL-1R KO BMDCs were either mock-treated or pre-treated with 100 ng IL-1b for 24 hours. Cells were then either mock-infected or infected with WNV at an MOI of 2.5. Both mock and WNV-infected samples were harvested at 24 and 48 hours. WT BMDCs were also treated with IL-1b for 24 or 48 hours before harvest. All samples were run in triplicate. Total RNA was run on Agilent 4x44 mouse microarray

PLATFORM
GPL7202 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T

