TITLE
Chemokine expression in the early response to injury in human airway epithelial cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Basal airway epithelial cells (AEC) constitute stem/progenitor cells within the central airways and respond to mucosal injury in an ordered sequence of spreading, migration, proliferation, and dif-ferentiation to needed cell types. However, dynamic gene transcription in the early events after mucosal injury has not been studied in AEC. We examined gene expression using microarrays following mechanical injury (MI) in primary human AEC grown in submersion culture to generate basal cells and in the air-liquid interface to generate differentiated AEC (dAEC) that include goblet and ciliated cells. A select group of ~150 genes was in differential expression (DE) within 2 - 24 hr after MI, and enrichment analysis of these genes showed over-representation of functional categories related to inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. Network-based gene prioritization and network reconstruction using the PINTA heat kernel diffusion algorithm demonstrated highly connected networks that were richer in differentiated AEC compared to basal cells. Similar ex-periments done in basal AEC collected from asthmatic donor lungs demonstrated substantial changes in DE genes and functional categories related to inflammation compared to basal AEC from normal donors. In dAEC, similar but more modest differences were observed. We demon-strate that the AEC transcription signature after MI identifies genes and pathways that are im-portant to the initiation and perpetuation of airway mucosal inflammation. Gene expression oc-curs quickly after injury and is more profound in differentiated AEC, and is altered in AEC from asthmatic airways. Our data suggest that the early response to injury is substantially different in asthmatic airways, particularly in basal airway epithelial cells.

DESIGN
Total RNA obtained from primary (AEC) and differentiated (dAEC) human airway epithelial cells subjected to 2, 8 or 24 hours in vitro mechanical injury compared to sham control. Cells were collected from six asthmatic donated lungs and cultured separated in submission or air liquid interface condition prior to injury.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

