TITLE
Gene expression profiling in BCR/ABL expressing HSCs

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The BCR-ABL oncogene,  generated by Philadelphia chromosome, is present in about 95% human Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and 20~30% acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). One of BCR-ABL isoforms, P210, is more often detected in CML and ALL patients. Although BCR-ABL kinase inhibitors are effective in controlling the diseases, they do not provide cure due to the development of drug resistance and the insensitivity of leukemia stem cells to these drugs. Identification of new therapeutic targets is critical. To identify potential target against leukemia stem cells, we studied gene expression in leukemia stem cells, which were identified in mice in our lab (Hu Y, Swerdlow S, Duffy TM, Weinmann R, Lee FY, Li S.  2006. Targeting multiple kinase pathways in leukemic progenitors and stem cells is essential for improved treatment of Ph+ leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103(45):16870-16875.). The sorted leukemia stem cells that expressed BCR-ABL were used for isolation of RNA, followed by the analysis of gene expression using the DNA microarray.  The same lineage of non-BCR-ABL-expressing normal hematopoietic stem cells was used as control. We have identified some interesting genes that are up- or down-regulated by BCR-ABL in these leukemia stem cells. We are currently studying the functions of these identified genes. Keywords: Genetic modification

DESIGN
Identification of genes that are regulated by BCR/ABL in HSCs. Bone marrow cells are isolated from the long bones of CML mice that are untreated or treated with imatinib. BCR-ABL-expressing or non-BCR-ABL-expressing (transduced with the empty GFP vector) hematopoietic stem cells (GFP+Lin-c-Kit+Sca-1+) are stored by FACS directly into RNAlater (Ambion, Austin, TX) and are homogenized in RLT Buffer (RNeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA)). Total RNA is isolated by following the protocol for the RNeasy Micro Kit, and quality is assessed using a 2100 Bioanalyzer instrument and RNA 6000 Pico LabChip assay (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA). Utilizing the GeneChip Whole Transcript Sense Target Labeling Assay kit (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA.) between 100-300ng of total RNA undergoes reverse transcription with random hexamers tagged with T7 sequence.  The double stranded cDNA that is generated is then amplified by T7 RNA polymerase to produce cRNA.  Second cycle first strand cDNA synthesis then takes place incorporating dUTP which is later used as sites where fragmentation occurs by utilizing an uracil DNA glycosylase and apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1 enzyme mix.  The fragmented cDNA is then labeled by terminal transferase attaching a biotin molecule using Affymetrix proprietary DNA labeling Reagent.  Approximately 2.0µg of fragmented and biotin-labeled cDNA is then hybridized onto a Mouse Gene ST 1.0 Array (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA.) for 16 hours at 45°C.  Post-hybridization staining and washing are performed according to manufacturer's protocols using the Fluidics Station 450 instrument (Affymetrix). Finally, the arrays are scanned with a GeneChip? Scanner 3000.  Images are acquired and cel files generated which are then used for analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19503090 , 21596859 , 22431519

