TITLE
NLRC5 deficiency protects against acute kidney injury in mice by mediating CEACAM1 signaling

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Although there is significant progress in understanding the structure and function of NLRC5, a member of the NOD like receptor (NLR) family, in the context of MHC class I gene expression, the functions of NLRC5 in innate and adaptive immune responses beyond the regulation of MHC class I genes remain controversial and unresolved. In particular, the role of NLRC5 in the kidney keeps unknown. In this study, we found that NLRC5 was significantly upregulated in the kidney from mice with renal ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI). NLRC5 deficient (NLRC5-/-) mice significantly ameliorated renal injury as evidenced by decreased serum creatinine levels, improved morphological injuries, and reduced inflammatory responses versus wild type mice. Similar protective effects were also observed in cisplatin-induced acute kidney injury (AKI). Mechanistically, NLRC5 contributed to renal injury by promoting tubular epithelial cell apoptosis and reducing inflammatory responses which is associated with, at least in part, the negative regulation of carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1 (CEACAM1). To determine the relative contribution of NLRC5 expression by parenchymal cells or leukocytes to renal damage during IRI, we generated bone marrow (BM) chimeric mice. NLRC5-/- mice engrafted with WT hematopoietic cells had significantly lower serum creatinine and less tubular damage than WT mice reconstituted with NLRC5-/- BM, suggesting that NLRC5 signaling in renal parenchymal cells plays the dominant role in mediating renal damage. Collectively, modulation of NLRC5-mediated pathway may have important therapeutic implications for patients with AKI.

DESIGN
NLRC5-/- mice and age-matched C57BL/6 wild type (WT) mice were used in this study, We established a bilateral renal ischemia model for 30min and mice were sacrificed after reperfusion at 48h.

PLATFORM
GPL7202 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T

