TITLE
Comparisons of gene expressions in zebrafish (Danio rerio) brain and gill after cold acclimation

ORGANISM
Danio rerio

SUMMARY
Ambient temperature affects organisms comprehensively, however cold responses are different among tissues. Here, we adopt a transcript screening approach to explore and compare the cold responses in zebrafish gills and brain. Zebrafish were exposed to cold and the oligonucleotide-based microarray was used to identify cold-induced genes. Principle component analysis (PCA) of the gene expression profiles indicated that gills develop different strategies for the increasing of exposure period while brain relatively remained stable. Combining statistic and clustering methods, we found that gills showed higher protein metabolism and cell activity while brain showed higher stress responses and detoxification during cold acclimation. According to the microarray data sets, we extended the study on ionocyte- and isotocin neuron-related genes in gills and brain, respectively, and found these genes were broadly stimulated by cold. These data suggest that cold activates specific physiological functions in different tissues. Taken together, our results provide molecular evidences to elucidate the cold acclimation in zebrafish gills and brain. Keywords: Time course, Tissue types

DESIGN
After the low-temperature treatment, brain and gill tissues dissected from 10 individuals were pooled as a sample and then homogenized in 0.8 ml Trizol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). 120 individuals (60 for low-temperature treatment and 60 for control) were sacrificed for each microarray hybridization experiment, and another 200 individuals were used for quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. After chloroform extraction, RNA precipitation and ethanol washing, the RNA samples were purified and treated with DNase1 to remove the genomic DNA by using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Huntsville, Alabama). The quantity and quality of total RNA were assessed by spectrophotometry and Bioanalyzer (Aglient Technologies, Foster City, CA). The commercial zebrafish 14K oligonucleotides set (MWG Biotech AG, Ebersbach, Germany) were obtained and were printed on UltraGAPS Coated slide (Corning, New York, NY ) with use of the OmniGrid 100 microarrayer (Genomic Solutions, Ann Arbor, MI) according to the manufacture’s instructions. The 14,067 oligonucleotides represent 9666 genes (7009 singlet genes and 2657 redundant genes), and the redundancy of this chip is 31 %. The detailed description of the oligonucleotides information can be obtained on the Ocimun Biosolution website. cDNA probes were synthesized and purified by reverse transcription of 20 μg total RNA using a SuperScript indirect cDNA labeling system (Invitrogen) and MinElute PCR purification kit (Qiagen) and were labeled with Alexa 647 dye (cold treatment groups) and Alexa 555 dye (control groups)(Invitrogen), respectively. The zebrafish 14K OciChip array chip was pretreated with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) (fraction V), 4x saline-sodium citrate (SSC), and 1% sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) at 42 °C for 45 min, and then hybridized overnight in a cocktail containing 5x Denhardt's solution, 6x SSC, 0.5% SDS, 50% formamide, 50 mM sodium phosphate, and 2 µg/µl yeast tRNA. Slides were washed with 2x SSC and 0.1% SDS (5 min), 1x SSC and 0.1% SDS (5 min), 0.5x SSC (5 min), and twice with 0.1x SSC (2 min each). Scanning was performed with a Genepix scanner (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA). The acquired images were analyzed using Genepix and Genespring software (Aglient Technologies, Foster City, CA). The measurements of spots were filtered by flags, and the Lowess normalization was performed after subtraction of the median background. Each experiment contained 3 biological replicates (including 1 dye swap) with different samples. The differentially expressed genes were selected from those with at least 2 of 3 significant signals (ratio > 2 or < 0.5), and then the Significant Analysis of Microarray method (SAM 3.02) was used to determine statistical significances.

PLATFORM
GPL5182 MWG_Zebrafish_14K

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

