TITLE
LSK cells transfected with Hhex retrovirus

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The Hematopoietically-expressed homeobox (Hhex) transcription factor is overexpressed in human myeloid leukemias. Conditional knockout models of murine acute myeloid leukemia (AML) indicate that Hhex maintains leukemia stem cell self-renewal by enabling Polycomb-mediated epigenetic repression of the Cdkn2a tumor suppressor locus, encoding p16Ink4a and p19Arf. However, whether Hhex overexpression also affects hematopoietic differentiation is unknown. To study this, we retrovirally overexpressed Hhex in hematopoietic progenitors. This enabled serial replating of myeloid progenitors, leading to the rapid establishment of IL-3-dependent promyelocytic cell lines. Use of a Hhex-ERT2 fusion protein demonstrated that continuous nuclear Hhex is required for transformation, and structure function analysis demonstrated a requirement of the DNA binding and N-terminal repressive domains of Hhex for promyelocytic transformation. This included the N-terminal Pml interaction domain, although deletion of Pml failed to prevent Hhex-induced promyelocyte transformation, implying other critical partners. Furthermore, deletion of p16Ink4a or p19Arf did not promote promyelocyte transformation, indicating that repression of distinct Hhex target genes is required for this process. Indeed, transcriptome analysis showed that Hhex overexpression resulted in repression of several myeloid developmental genes. To test potential for Hhex overexpression to contribute to leukemic transformation, Hhex-transformed promyelocyte lines were rendered growth factor-independent using a constitutively active IL-3 receptor common b subunit (bcV449E). The resultant cell lines resulted in a rapid promyelocytic leukemia in vivo. Thus Hhex overexpression can contribute to myeloid leukemia via multiple mechanisms including differentiation blockade and enabling epigenetic repression of the Cdkn2a locus.

DESIGN
3 biological replicates of MIG-Hhex transduced LSK cells and 3 biological replicates of MIG transduced LSK cells as controls. Differential gene expression analysis of LSK cells from C57BL/6 mice transduced with either MIG or MIG-Hhex retrovirus and cultured for two days.

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

