TITLE
Expression profile of cultured CD4 T cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
After activation via TCR, naïve CD4 T cells differentiate into several subsets including effector helper T cells and TGF-b-dependent inducible regulatory T (Treg) cells. These differentiated CD4 T cell subsets are more plastic than have previously been assumed to be, and some transdifferentiations among subsets have been reported. However, Th1 cells are one of the most stable subsets, and reprogramming of Th1 to Treg cells, especially underlining mechanism(s) of such conversion, has not been investigated in depth. Here we established a culture method of inducing Foxp3 expression from differentiated Th1 cells. This is achieved simply by resting Th1 cells in the absence of TCR ligation before stimulation in the presence of TGF-b. We named these Th1-derived Foxp3+ cells Th1reg cells. Th1reg cells showed an iTreg-like phenotype and suppressive ability. Th1reg cells induced with vitamin C showed high stability of Foxp3 expression in vitro and in vivo. Th1reg cells could also be induced from in vivo-developed Th1 cells prepared from mice with graft versus host disease. Surprisingly, the resting process did not induce appreciable change in epigenetic modifications at the Foxp3 locus, but down-regulated the mTORC1 activity of Th1 cells. Shift from glycolysis, downstream of the mTORC1 pathway, to oxidative phosphorylation-dependent metabolism was important for the induction of Th1reg cells. Both expression and TGF-b-induced phosphorylation of Smad2/3 were impaired in Th1 cells, and inhibition of mTORC1 restored the phosphorylation. Our study would lead to the development of a novel therapy for Th1-type aberrant inflammation.

DESIGN
CD4 T cells cultured under different conditions are profiled for mRNA expression

PLATFORM
GPL10787 Agilent-028005 SurePrint G3 Mouse GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T

