TITLE
pre-B cells from normal control, preleukemic, fully leukemic and fully leukemic, nilotinib-treated P190 BCR/ABL transgenic mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Precursor B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia (pre-B ALL) can be subdivided into different categories based on genetic abnormalities. One type of pre-B ALL is characterized by the presence of the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome, the derivative chromosome 22 that is one product of a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 22 and 9. The 22/9 translocation fuses the 5’ part of the BCR gene to the 3’ end of the c-ABL gene. The resulting BCR/ABL fusion encodes a Bcr/Abl protein with deregulated Abl kinase activity. Two major fusion proteins are found in Ph-positive leukemias which differ in molecular weight and the size of the Bcr moiety. The P190 Bcr/Abl protein is common in Ph-positive ALL. Targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as nilotinib are used therapeutically to treat this type of leukemia. The 22/9 translocation fuses the 5’ part of the BCR gene to the 3’ end of the c-ABL gene. The resulting BCR/ABL fusion encodes a Bcr/Abl protein with deregulated Abl kinase activity. Two major fusion proteins are found in Ph-positive leukemias which differ in molecular weight and the size of the Bcr moiety. The P190 Bcr/Abl protein is common in Ph-positive ALL. Targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as nilotinib are used therapeutically to treat this type of leukemia.

DESIGN
Mice transgenic for the human P190 form of Bcr/Abl (Jackson Labs strain 017833) develop precursor B-lineage (pre-B) acute lymphoblastic leukemia, on average within 3 months of birth, when on a C57Bl/6J background. Bone marrows were isolated from control C57BLl/6J mice and from transgenic Bcr/Abl mice when they had not yet developed full-blown leukemia ( < 60 days of age), from Bcr/Abl transgenic mice with overt leukemia and packed bone marrows ( > 90 days of age), and from fully leukemic mice that had received a seven-day treatment with 75 mg/kg AMN107 (nilotinib). Three mice were used per condition, and cells from each mouse were processed separately. Pre-B cells from these twelve bone marrows were flow-sorted using CD19 and AA4.1 as markers. Total RNA from CD19+ AA4.1+cells used for microarray analysis was isolated by RNeasy (QIAGEN) purification. Double-strand complementary DNA was generated from 5 µg of total RNA using a poly(dT) oligonucleotide that contains a T7 RNA polymerase initiation site and the SuperScript III reverse transcription (Invitrogen). Biotinylated cRNA was generated and fragmented according to the Affymetrix protocol and hybridized to 430 mouse microarrays (Affymetrix).

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T

