TITLE
Shared gene expression profiles in developmental heart valve remodeling and osteoblast progenitor cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
E12.5 AV cushion and E17.5 AV valve from wild-type FVB/N mice and in vitro cultured MC3T3 cells In the study we demonstrated shared gene expression in embryonic heart valve development and Osteoblast progenitor cells. The atrioventricular (AV) valves of the heart develop from undifferentiated mesenchymal endocardial cushions, that later remodel into stratified valves with diversified extracellular matrix (ECM). Because the mature valves express genes associated with osteogenesis and exhibit disease-associated calcification, we hypothesized the existence of shared regulatory pathways active in the remodeling AV valves and in bone progenitor cells. In order to define gene regulatory programs of valvulogenesis relative to osteoblast progenitors, we undertook Affymetrix gene expression profiling analysis of murine embryonic day (E)12.5 AV cushions compared to E17.5 remodeled AV valves (mitral and tri-cuspid) and to pre-osteoblast MC3T3-E1 (subclone4) cells. Overall MC3T3 cells were significantly more similar to E17.5 valves than to E12.5 cushions, supporting the hypothesis that valve remodeling involves the expression of many genes also expressed in osteoblasts. Several transcription factors characteristic of mesenchymal and osteoblast precursor cells, including Twist1 are predominant in E12.5 cushion. Valve remodeling also includes differential regulation of matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitors as well as characteristic collagen isoform switching. Among the most highly enriched genes during valvulogenesis were members of the small leucine-rich proteoglycan (SLRP) family including Asporin, a known negative regulator of osteoblast differentiation and mineralization.  Together, these data support shared gene expression profiles of the remodeling valves and osteoblast bone precursor cells in normal valve development and homeostasis with potential functions in calcific valve disease. Keywords: Embryonic valve development time point

DESIGN
In the study, we hybridized RNA from E12.5 AV cushion and E17.5 AV valve from wild-type FVB/N mice and in vitro cultured MC3T3 cells to Affymetrix MOE430 2 GeneChip® arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
18612084

