TITLE
Effects of in utero and lactational exposure to new generation green plasticizers on adult male rats: a comparative study with di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP), a widely used plasticizer, is a ubiquitous environmental pollutant and may act as an endocrine disruptor. Early life exposures to DEHP may result in anti-androgenic effects, impairing the development of the male reproductive tract. However, data on the long-lasting consequences of such DEHP exposures on adult male reproductive function are still rare and discrepant. Previously, we identified two novel plasticizers, 1,4 butanediol dibenzoate (BDB) and dioctyl succinate (DOS), as potential substitutes for DEHP that did not reproduce classically described endocrine disrupting phenotypes in prepubertal male offspring after maternal exposure. Here, we investigated the consequences of in utero and lactational exposure to BDB and DOS on adult male rat reproductive function in a comparative study with DEHP and a commercially available alternative plasticizer, 1,2-cyclohexane dicarboxylic acid diisononyl ester (DINCH). Timed pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were gavaged with vehicle or a test chemical (30 or 300 mg/kg/day) from gestation day 8 to postnatal day 21. While DEHP exposure (300 mg/kg/day) significantly increased epididymal weight in the adult, exposure to DINCH, BDB or DOS did not affect reproductive organ weights, steroid levels or sperm quality. Using a toxicogenomic microarray approach, we found that adult testicular gene expression was affected by exposure to the higher dose of DEHP; transcripts such as Nr5a2, Ltf or Runx2 were significantly downregulated, suggesting that DEHP was targeting estrogen signaling. Lesser effects were observed after treatment with either DINCH or BDB. DOS exposure did not produce such effects, confirming its potential as a responsible substitute for DEHP. The data deposited correspond to testicular gene expression in 90 day-old Sprague-Dawley rats after exposure to CORN OIL and 30 or 300 mg/kg/day DEHP, DINCH, BDB or DOS from gestational day 8 to post-natal day 21

DESIGN
For each of the 9 treatment groups (CORN OIL, DEHP 30, DEHP 300, DINCH 30, DINCH 300, BDB 30, BDB 300, DOS 30, DOS 300), RNA was extracted from the testes of 6 animals from independent litters

PLATFORM
GPL15084 Agilent-028279 SurePrint G3 Rat GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T

