TITLE
MicroRNA expression in serum samples of sulfur mustard veterans as a diagnostic gateway to improve care

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Sulfur mustard is a vesicant chemical warfare agent, which has been used during Iraq-Iran-war. Many veterans and civilians still suffer from long-term complications of sulfur mustard exposure, especially in their lung. Although the lung lesions of these patients are similar to Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), there are some differences due to different etiology and clinical care. Less is known on the molecular mechanism of sulfur mustard patients and specific treatment options. microRNAs are master regulators of many biological pathways and proofed to be stable surrogate markers in body fluids. Based on that microRNA expression for serum samples of sulfur mustard patients were examined, to establish specific microRNA patterns as a basis for diagnostic use and insight into affected molecular pathways. Patients were categorized based on their long-term complications into three groups and microRNA serum levels were measured. The differentially regulated microRNAs and their corresponding gene targets were identified. Cell cycle arrest, ageing and TGF-beta signaling pathways showed up to be the most deregulated pathways. The candidate microRNA miR-143-3p could be validated on all individual patients. In a ROC analysis miR-143-3p turned out to be a suitable diagnostic biomarker in the mild and severe categories of patients. Further microRNAs which might own a link to the biology of the sulfur mustard patients are miR-365a-3p, miR-200a-3p, miR-663a. miR-148a-3p, which showed up only in a validation study, might be linked to the airway complications of the sulfur mustard patients. All the other candidate microRNAs do not directly link to COPD phenotype or lung complications. In summary the microRNA screening study characterizes several molecular difference in-between the clinical categories of the sulfur mustard exposure groups and established some useful microRNA biomarkers.

DESIGN
6 samples in three groups, two replicates each, are provided. n: denotes serum samples from healthy patients not affected by sulfur mustard. The i:mild and s:severe group comprises patients which show a weak or strong sulfur mustard disease phenotype maybe reflecting a true disease progression. The objectives of this study were to find out if the microRNA expression is differentially expressed in serum samples of SMV compared to normal ones, and which biological pathways are linked to the differentially expressed microRNAs. This can be exploited in defining therapeutic strategies for the clinical procedures or diagnostic applications. Here, microRNAs might offer an appropriate and reliable diagnostic alternative, which can be a substitute for more inaccurate diagnostic methods of SMV like high resolution CT scan and PFT. Finally, this study should help to reconfirm some preliminary aspects of previous research efforts.

PLATFORM
GPL24621 microRNA Ready-to-Use PCR, Human panel I+II, V2.R

CITATIONS
29566027

