TITLE
Iron acquisition system and cell shape of host bacteria commonly respond to the carriage of three plasmids belonging to different incompatibility groups.

ORGANISM
Pseudomonas putida

SUMMARY
Plasmids are one of the important mobile genetic elements in bacterial evolution. In this study, to evaluate the generality of the impact of plasmid carriage on host cell between different plasmids, we compared the response of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 to harboring three natural plasmids; RP4 (IncP-1, multidrug resistance, 60,099-bp), pCAR1 (IncP-7, carbazole-degradative, 200,231-bp) and NAH7 (IncP-9, naphthalene-degradative, 82,232-bp). We prepared two sets of plasmid-harboring strains from independent conjugation events to elucidate the reproducibility of the impact of the plasmid carriage. As results, the fitness was reduced by the carriage of RP4 and pCAR1 in liquid medium, while it was unaffected or even improved for NAH7-harboring strains. RP4-harboring KT2440 formed smaller colonies than the plasmid-free strain on solid medium (1.6% agar). The host cells were elongated by the carriage of the all plasmids, respectively. Copy number determination by quantitative PCR showed that the amount of each plasmid DNA in the host cell did not differed drastically. Whole genome resequencing showed that 13 SNPs (RP4), 24 SNPs (pCAR1) and 5 SNPs (NAH7) were the total differences between the two substrains for each plasmid-harboring strains. Transcriptome analyses showed that the impact of plasmid carriage was constantly larger in RP4-harboring strain than the other two plasmid-harboring strains. Genes involved in metal acquisition and metabolism were commonly affected by the carriage of the three plasmid. Indeed, plasmid-harboring strains showed greater growth inhibition than plasmid-free strains under iron-limiting condition. This feature could become future target to control plasmid spreading.

DESIGN
Transcriptome analysis was performed using Pseudomonas putida KT2440 harboring one of the three plasmid (RP4, pCAR1, NAH7), respectively. RNA maps of the donor or the plasmid-free strain were used as controls. Biologically duplicated data were obtained.

PLATFORM
GPL8296 [KT2440b520511F] Pseudomonas putida KT2440 chromosome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T

