TITLE
A kinome-wide RNAi screen identifies ALK as a target to sensitize neuroblastoma cells for HDAC8-inhibitor treatment

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The prognosis of advanced stage neuroblastoma patients remains poor and, despite intensive  therapy, the 5-year survival rate remains less than 50%. We previously identified histone deacetylase  (HDAC) 8 as an indicator of poor clinical outcome and a selective drug target for differentiation  therapy in vitro and in vivo. Here we performed kinome-wide RNAi screening to identify genes that  are synthetically lethal with HDAC8 inhibitors. These experiments identified the neuroblastoma  predisposition gene ALK as a candidate gene. Accordingly, the combination of the ALK/MET inhibitor  crizotinib and selective HDAC8 inhibitors (3-6μM PCI-34051 or 10μM 20a) efficiently killed  neuroblastoma cell lines carrying wildtype ALK (SK-N-BE(2)-C, IMR5/75), amplified ALK (NB-1), and  those carrying the activating ALK F1174L mutation (Kelly), and, in cells carrying the activating R1275Q  mutation (LAN-5), combination treatment decreased viable cell count. The effective dose of crizotinib  in neuroblastoma cell lines ranged from 0.05μM (ALK-amplified) to 0.8μM (wildtype ALK). The  combinatorial inhibition of ALK and HDAC8 also decreased tumor growth in an in vivo zebrafish  xenograft model. Bioinformatic analyses revealed that the mRNA expression level of HDAC8 was  significantly correlated with that of ALK in two independent patient cohorts, the Academic Medical  Center cohort (n=88) and the German Neuroblastoma Trial cohort (n=649), and co-expression of  both target genes identified patients with very poor outcome. Mechanistically, HDAC8 and ALK  converge at the level of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling and their downstream survival  pathways, such as ERK signaling. Combination treatment of HDAC8 inhibitor with crizotinib efficiently  blocked the activation of growth receptor survival signaling and shifted the cell cycle arrest and  differentiation phenotype toward effective cell death of neuroblastoma cell lines, including  sensitization of resistant models, but not of normal cells. These findings reveal combined targeting of  ALK and HDAC8 as a novel strategy for the treatment of neuroblastoma.

DESIGN
Total RNA was isolated from neuroblastoma cells (SK-N-BE(2)-C) treated for six days with solvent control (DMSO) or an HDAC8 inhibitor (PCI-34051; 4µM).

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

