TITLE
HSD17B10, RPL8, IFITM2 and IFITM3 as predictive markers of response to chemotherapy in conventional osteosarcomas.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The aim of this study was to identify molecular markers able to classify osteosarcoma patients as good or poor responders before therapy. Methods: Gene expression profiling of 20 non-metastatic high-grade osteosarcoma patients was performed using cDNA nylon microarray which contained 8,032 unique sequenced-verified cDNA clones, representing 5,776 distinct genes. Expression of selected genes was validated using RTQ-PCR. For correlated genes, corresponding proteins were explored. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) on sections of tissue microarrays (TMA) were performed on a cohort of 50 patients, out of which 30 were new patients. Furthermore, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed on gene which could not be tested using IHC. Results: We have found that HSD17B10 gene expression was upregulated in the group of poor responders and that IHC expression of HSD17B10 in biopsy done before treatment was correlated to response to chemotherapy in 50 patients. Other relevant results include correlation of IFITM2, IFITM3 and RPL8 gene expression to response to chemotherapy. RPL8 gene expression also had a prognostic value for event-free survival. Moreover, a significant statistical correlation was found between polysomy 8 of RPL8 and good response to chemotherapy. Conclusion:  These data suggest that HSD17B10 gene may be a biological marker and a therapeutic target in conventional osteosarcoma. This study highlights the prognostic and the predictive value of RPL8. RPL8 and IFITM2 may be useful in the assessment of patients with osteosarcoma at diagnosis and for stratifying patients taking part in randomized trials. Keywords: Gene-expression profiling

DESIGN
Gene expression profiling of 20 non-metastatic high-grade osteosarcoma patients was performed using spotted cDNA nylon membrane

PLATFORM
GPL4819 UMGC-IRCNA 9k A

CITATIONS
19449377

