TITLE
Glial derived neurotrophic factor promotes ovarian primordial follicle development during folliculogenesis

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Female fertility is determined in part by the size and development of the primordial follicle pool. The current study investigates the role of glial cell-line derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) in the regulation of primordial follicle development in the ovary. Ovaries from four-day old female rat pups were maintained in organ culture for ten days in the absence (control) or presence of GDNF or kit ligand/stem cell factor (KL). Ovaries treated with GDNF contained a significant increase in developing follicles, similar to that observed with KL treatment previously shown to promote follicle development. The actions of GDNF on the ovarian transcriptome were investigated with a microarray analysis. Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated that GDNF is localized to oocyte cytoplasm in follicles of all developmental stages, as well as to cumulus granulosa cells and theca cells in antral follicles. GDNF receptor alpha 1 (GFRalpha1) staining was localized to oocyte cytoplasm of primordial and primary follicles, and at reduced levels in oocytes of antral follicles. GFRalpha1 was present in mural granulosa cells of antral follicles, theca cells, and the ovarian surface epithelium. The localization studies were confirmed with molecular analysis. Microarray analysis was used to identify changes in the ovarian transcriptome and further elucidate the signaling network regulating early follicle development. Observations indicate that GDNF promotes primordial follicle development and mediates autocrine and paracrine cell-cell interactions required during folliculogenesis. In contrast to the testis, ovarian GDNF is predominantly produced by germ cells (oocytes) rather than somatic cells. Keywords: expression analysis, glial derived neurotrophic factor, follicle transition, ovary

DESIGN
RNA samples from two control groups (pooled untreated cultured ovaries) are compared to two treated groups (pooled cultured ovaries treated with GDNF)

PLATFORM
GPL1355 [Rat230_2] Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
18304989

