TITLE
Gene expression induced by localized nitrate in a split-root system

ORGANISM
Zea mays

SUMMARY
Arable soils are extremely heterogeneous in spatial nutrient distribution. It is well documented that lateral roots (LRs) proliferate in nitrate-rich patch. Yet less information is available as to which genes are involved in this process, in particular in cereals. To understand the molecular mechanism for local nitrate induced LR growth in maize (Zea mays L.), we analyzed the gene expression profiling in maize root in early response (1 hour) to local nitrate stimulation by using Maize Oligonucleotide Array ( http://www.maizearray.org ) and a split-root system. Selected differentially expressed genes were further confirmed by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. The results showed that reception and/or transduction of local NO3- signal involve some important protein kinases and protein phosphatases (histidine kinases, serine/threonine kinases, protein phosphatase 2A etc.) and transcription factors (F-box, Zinc finger, Myb and bZIP transcription factors and response regulator). Increasing expression of genes encoding auxin response factor 7b, ethylene receptor, and cytokinin oxidase suggests strong interaction among hormonal pathways and local NO3- signaling pathways. Genes involving NO3- uptake and assimilation (NRT2.1, NR, etc.), sugar transport (a sugar transporter) and utilization (a sucrose synthase) were enhanced in the N-fed root. Furthermore, local NO3- induces rapid expression of genes related to cell division and expansion such as alpha-expansin, celluose synthase, kinesin, plasma membrane and tonoplast aquaporins. Based on the differentially expressed genes, a putative model which combines both the 'NO3- signal' and 'metabolic sink' theories is proposed to explain the molecular mechanism controlling local nitrate induced LR elongation in maize.

DESIGN
plants were pre-cultured in solution containing 0.5 mmol L-1 NO3- for 6 days and then transferred to N-free solution to grow for another 2 days. Then these plants were transferred to a two-compartment split-root system with only half root supplied with 1.0 mmol L-1 NO3-. Supply of Ca2+ in the N-free half was compensated by adding 1.0 mmol L-1 CaCl2. One hour after the local nitrate treatment, root segments (15cm from root tip to lateral root elongation zone) were sampled for RNA extraction. Two biological replicates were performed for each treatment.

PLATFORM
GPL6733 China Agricultural University Zea Mays 32K Version A GPL6734 China Agricultural University Zea Mays 32K Version B

CITATIONS
Microarray analysis reveals early responsive genes possibly involved in localized nitrate stimulation of lateral root development in maize (Zea mays L.). Plant Science, Volume 175, Issue 3, September 2008, Pages 272-282. doi:10.1016/j.plantsci.2008.04.009

