TITLE
Hippocampus of HuD overexpressor mice (perro-affy-mouse-309741)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Post-transcriptional mechanisms play an important role in the control of gene expression. RNA-binding proteins are key players in the post-transcriptional control of many neural genes and they participate in multiple processes, from RNA splicing and mRNA transport to mRNA stability and translation. Our laboratory has developed the first mouse model overexpressing a RNA-binding protein, the ELAV-like protein HuD, in the CNS under the control of the CaMKinII alpha promoter. Initial behavioral characterization of the mice revealed that they had significant learning deficits together with abnormalities in prepulse inhibition (PPI). At the molecular level, we found that the expression of the growth-associated protein GAP-43, one of the targets of HuD, was increased in the hippocampus of HuD transgenic mice. To characterize these mice further and to evaluate the utility of these animals in understanding human diseases, we propose to use DNA microarray methods. To characterize the pattern of gene expression in the hippocampus of HuD overexpressor mice Based on the behavioral and molecular properties of our HuD transgenic mice we hypothesize that these animals may be good models for the studying the basis of learning disabilities and of diseases that show deficits in PPI such as fetal alcohol syndrome and schizophrenia. All mice are in C57BL/6 background and are male approximately 30 days old. Animals are bred and sacrificed according to our approved animal protocol.  Brains will be rapidly dissected on ice, quickly frozen and stored at -80C until analysis. Frozen brains will be embedded in OCT and shipped to the DNA microarray facility at Duke University where LCM was performed. Dentate granule cells from control and HuD transgenic mice will be isolated by Susan Su, who will also perform RNA isolation and the first round of RNA amplification. For our first experiment, we want to examine the pattern of gene expression in the hippocampus of 2 transgenic mice and 2 non-transgenic littermates. Keywords: HuD, hippocampus

