TITLE
Metabolic and Transcriptional Response of Dunaliella viridis Under Different Nitrogen Conditions

ORGANISM
Dunaliella viridis

SUMMARY
The halophytic green alga Dunaliella viridis has been shown to be recalcitrant to utilization of organic nitrogen sources, although it can survive on histidine and the ammonium (NH4+) derived from abiotic degradation of amino acids.  The supplementation of NH4+ from glutamine degradation has also been shown to support acceptable growth and increased neutral lipid production in comparison to nitrate.  Glutamine degradation also slowly releases NH4+ which is advantageous since ammonia is very toxic in the alkaline environment in which D. viridis grows.  Cellular metabolite levels, growth parameters, and transcription were assessed at 0, 24, and 48 hours following inoculation into media containing nitrate, glutamine, glutamate, or no nitrogen in order to explore the metabolic shift caused by NH4+.  Growth parameters (cell density, pH) showed that NH4+ and nitrate were similar; however, metabolic data (chlorophyll, carbohydrate, protein) showed that the NH4+ sample more closely resembled the cultures under nitrogen starvation (no nitrogen and glutamate).  Quantification of neutral lipids showed no significant difference between nitrate and NH4+.  RNA Sequencing indicated that NH4+ caused an immediate transcriptional response; however, by 48 hours the NH4+ samples entered a nitrogen starvation response rather than a modified metabolic state, suggesting degradation of glutamine was too slow to demonstrate the transcriptional and metabolic consequences of growth on NH4+.  Comparison of the nitrogen starvation and nitrate conditions indicated downregulation of fatty acid synthesis and mixed regulation of the TCA cycle under nitrogen starvation, which coincides with accumulation of more starch than neutral lipids.  D. viridis appears to favor starch production by transcriptionally draining free pyruvate away to avoid conversion to acetyl-CoA and eventual fatty acids.

DESIGN
Dunaliella viridis cells were grown on 3 different nitrogen sources, glutamate, glutamine, nitrate, and no nitrogen over a course of 48 hours with triplicate sequencing samples taken at 0hr, 24hr, and 48hrs.

PLATFORM
GPL24702 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Dunaliella viridis)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

