TITLE
Microarray analysis of rice plants fumigated with ozone

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa

SUMMARY
In this study, integrated transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics approaches were applied to investigate the molecular responses of O3 in the leaves of two-weeks old rice (cv. Nipponbare) seedlings exposed to 0.2 ppm O3 for a period of 24 h.  Based on the morphological alteration of O3-exposed rice leaves, transcript profiling of rice genes was performed in leaves exposed for 1, 12 and 24 h using rice DNA microarray chip, proteomics and metabolomics. This systematic survey showed that O3 triggers a chain reaction of altered gene, protein and metabolite expressions involved in multiple cellular processes in rice. Also investigated were the molecular responses in the leaves of two-weeks old rice (cv. Nipponbare) seedlings under continuous light and pure air (as a positive control for ozone exposure experiments) for a period of 24 h. Transcript profiling of rice genes was performed in leaves exposed for 1, 12 and 24 h using rice DNA microarray chip, proteomics and metabolomics. This systematic survey showed that continuous light and growth for 24 h also triggers a chain reaction of altered gene expressions involved in multiple cellular processes in rice, but different from those against ozone, in general. Keywords: Ozone fumigation response

DESIGN
Ozone-treated Samples: An in vivo 14-days-old rice seedling model system was used, where whole seedlings were used for exposure/fumigation to the ozone (0.2 ppm). Dye-swap or reverse labeling with Cy3 and Cy5 dyes procedure was applied followed by hybridization and wash processes, and the hybridized microarrays (G4138A) were scanned using a GenePix microarray scanner followed by the Gene Pix 4000 analysis application program for image analysis and data extraction processes. The GeneSpring Ver. 4 software was used for normalization. Control Samples: An in vivo 14-days-old rice seedling model system was used, where whole seedlings were used for exposure to continuous light and pure air. Dye-swap or reverse labeling with Cy3 and Cy5 dyes procedure was applied followed by hybridization and wash processes, and the hybridized microarrays (G4138A) were scanned using a Standard protocol of Agilent DNA Microarray Scanner and data processing was done by Feature Extraction software Version 8.1 from Agilent Technologies.

PLATFORM
GPL892 Agilent-012106 Rice Oligo Microarray G4138A (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
18517257

