TITLE
Transcriptomic analysis of responses to infectious salmon anemia virus infection in macrophage-like cells

ORGANISM
Salmo salar

SUMMARY
The aquatic orthomyxovirus infectious salmon anemia virus (ISAV) is an important pathogen for salmonid aquaculture, however little is known about protective and pathological host responses to infection. We have investigated intracellular responses during cytopathic ISAV infection in the macrophage-like Atlantic salmon kidney (ASK) cell line by microarray analysis (1.8K SFA2.0 immunochip) and a functional assay for glutathione. Gene transcription changed rapidly and consistently with time and with minor differences between two virus isolates. While several pro-inflammatory and antiviral immune genes were induced, genes involved in cell signaling and integrity were down-regulated, suggesting isolation of infected cells from cell-to-cell interaction and responses to external signals. Differential expression of genes regulating cell cycle and apoptosis implied opposite cues from host cell and virus. This was in pace with massive down-regulation of genes involved in biosynthesis and processing of nucleotides and nucleic acids. Significant down-regulation of several genes involved in metabolism of reactive oxygen species suggested increased oxidative stress, which was confirmed by a functional assay showing reduced levels of glutathione during infection. Testing of expression data against a microarray database containing diverse experiments revealed candidate marker genes for ISAV infection. Our findings provide novel insight into cellular host responses and determinants for acute cytopathic ISAV infection. Keywords: Infectious salmon anemia virus (ISAV); Host response; Molecular pathology; Microarray; Macrophage; Oxidative stress

DESIGN
ASK cells infected with ISAV isolate 2 and 4 and mock-infected were cultured in triplicates and total RNA pooled from each at the following time-points post-infection; 1, 3 and 5 days. For microarray analysis, single-slide hybridisation was applied between infected RNA (Cy5 labelled) and control RNA (Cy3 labelled) for each time-point. Results were verified by real-time qPCR.

PLATFORM
GPL6154 UKU_trout_1.8K_v1

CITATIONS
18534703

