TITLE
PhyloChip-based characterization of stool samples from Familial Mediterranean Fever patients and the effects of probiotic Lactobacillus acidophilus INMIA 9602 Er 317/402

ORGANISM
human gut metagenome

SUMMARY
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an inflammatory genetic disease characterized by elevated systemic reactivity against commensal gut microbiota and high levels of gut Candida albicans.  The current study investigated the effects of Lactobacillus acidophillus INMIA 9602 Er 317/402 strain (probiotic “Narine”) on the relative abundance of gut enteric bacteria, lactobacilli, Staphylococcus aureus, and Enteroccocus faecalis in Candida albicans-carrier and non-carrier FMF patients in remission with the main MEFV mutation patterns M694V/V726A- the prevalent MEFV gene mutation within FMF patients in the Armenian cohort.   Our data revealed that M694V/V726A mutations in PURIN inflammasome leading to FMF disease brought to gender specific differences in microbial community structure in FMF patients. Possibly, long-term colchicine use suppresses the PURIN inflammasome/inhibits NLRP3 inflammasome-dependent IL-1β release influencing on overgrowth of C. albicans in gut microbiota of FMF patients.  The comparison of Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) of enteric bacteria in C. albicans-carrier and non-carrier female patients revealed the statistically significant increase in OTUs of enterobacteria in C. albicans-carriers. In contrast to this, there were no differences in abundance of Enteroccocus faecalis between female FMF C. albicans-carriers compared with non-carriers, while male FMF C. albicans-carriers have increased abundance of  E. faecalis  in their gut microbiota compared with that of male patients with none carriers. The gut microbiota of FMF patients (both male and female) with C. albicans below baseline level contains high abundance of lactobacilli compared with C. albicans-carriers.  The adoption of Lactobacillus acidophilus INMIA 9602 Er 317/402 leads to changes in gut microbiota composition of FMF patients. It reduces, in particularly, the abundance of enterobacteria in females, and Enteroccocus faecalis in men parallel with reducing the numbers of yeast in gut microbiota of FMF patients.  We hypothesize that colchicine treatment changes the already-altered gut microbiota of FMF patients, thereby affecting the regulation of immune system by inhibition of NLRP3 inflammasome. Colchicine could lead to overgrowth of C. albicans in gut microbiota of FMF patients, whereas the Lactobacillus acidophilus INMIA 9602 Er 317/402 works on activation of inflammasome by new changes in gut microbiota of patients.

DESIGN
166 samples, patients diagnosed with Familial Mediterranean Fever were given either placebo or treated with Narine or Colibacteron. The human fecal metagenome was analyzed pre- and post-treatment. Please note that the array probe sequences are under patent therefore no CDF or probe mapping file is available.

PLATFORM
GPL24736 [LBL-Phy3b520660] Affymetrix PhyloChip G3

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T
