TITLE
Physiological concentration changes of intracellular spermine activates DNA methyltransferase 3A and 3B and affects gene methylation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Polyamines are essential for various cell functions and are produced in most cells, as well as being taken up from extracellular sources. Polyamines, especially spermine, in blood cells increase when polyamines are supplied from the digestive tract. Altered polyamine metabolism has an impact on substrate concentrations and enzyme activities involved in gene methylation, and may affect gene expression. Therefore, we investigated the effect of decreased polyamine synthesis and extracellular spermine supply on substrate concentrations and enzyme activities involved in gene methylation and on changes of methylation in promoter regions using methylation arrays. In Jurkat cells and human mammary epithelial cells, changes in polyamine concentrations differed after polyamine synthesis inhibition. However, S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase activity and the decarboxylated S-adenosylmethionine to S-adenosyl-L-methionine ratio were decreased by spermine addition in both cells. After inhibiting polyamine synthesis in Jurkat cells by D,L-alpha-difluoromethylornithine, the protein levels of DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) 1, 3A and 3B were not changed, but the activity of the three enzymes markedly decreased. The protein levels of these enzymes were not changed by addition of spermine; however, DNMT 3B was markedly activated and DNMT 3A was also activated. DNMT 1 was not activated. Effects on methylation of promoter regions included significant changes for tumor suppressor genes in response to altered polyamine metabolism. However, no significant changes in methylation status were found on genes of which methylation status and their related protein levels were affected by spermine. When considering these results, there are many genes for which polyamines have an impact on expression via methylation of promoter regions.

DESIGN
In order to asess the methylation status under depletion or supplementation of polyamine (Spermine), four DNA samples obtained from Jurkat cells cultured in  were analyzed in four different conditon as follows; Control,   D,L-alpha-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO)(+), Spermine (+), DFMO+Spermine

PLATFORM
GPL21145 Infinium MethylationEPIC

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .
