TITLE
Newly identified interferon tau-responded cytidine/uridine monophosphate kinase 2 and Hes family BHLH transcription factor 4 genes in bovine peripheral blood cells at peri-implantation period

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
In cattle, interferon-stimulating genes (ISGs) such as ISG15, MX1, MX2, and OAS1 are known as classical ISGs that are intensely involved in the implantation process. Various molecules play a crucial role in the mechanism underlying ISG effects. Although microarray analysis highlighted the expression of various molecules during the implantation period, these are incompletely characterized. In the present study, some specifically expressed genes were selected and their characteristics were examined. The microarray data of peripheral blood leucocytes from artificially inseminated and embryo-transferred cows were used to identify new ISG candidates. Seven common genes, including ISG15 and OAS1, were confirmed, but only four of these were amplified by reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction. These showed significantly higher expression in pregnant cows than in non-pregnant cows. Moreover, three expressed sequence tags (ESTs) showed significantly higher expression in granulocytes after IFNT stimulation. NCBI BLAST analysis revealed the similar sequences of two ESTs on chromosome 16 that were deemed as Hes family BHLH transcription factor 4 (HES4). Another EST was identified on chromosome 11 as cytidine/uridine monophosphate kinase 2 (CMPK2). The promoter sequences of HES4 and CMPK2 were cloned and analyzed from DNA of whole blood cells in cyclic Holstein cows. In silico analysis facilitated the identification of the transcription factor-binding sequences, including interferon-stimulated response element- and interferon regulatory factor-binding sites, on the promoter region of HES4 and CMPK2. These genes may be one of the new ISGs related to embryo implantation and may participate in the coordination of feto-maternal interface in cows.

DESIGN
Bovine peripheral blood granulocytes were obtained from cows on Day 21 pregnant (n=4) by embryo transfer and before embryo transfer (n=4, non-pregnant at Day 7 estrous cycle).

PLATFORM
GPL19801 Agilent-018964 NIAS Designed Custom Agilent Bovine 15K Oligo DNA Microarray (Probe name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T
