TITLE
Microarray expression data from FVB mice with induced hepatoblastoma (liver tumors)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Hepatoblastoma (HB) is the most common pediatric liver tumor, and there are no targeted therapies available for children with HB. We have previously developed a murine model of HB which is driven by coactivation of the oncogenes YAP1 and β-catenin (CTNNB1) [Tao J, Calvisi D, Ranganathan S, et al. Gastroenterology, 2014 Sep; 147(3): 690–701]. We used the Sleeping Beauty transposase system combined with hydrodynamic tail vein injection to deliver plasmids containing mutant activated forms of YAP1 (YAP S127A) and β-catenin (ΔN90 β-catenin) to a small number of pericentral hepatocytes. We have shown that these few transformed hepatocytes proliferate and dedifferentiate, eventually forming histologically heterogeneous tumors that  resemble various subtypes of human HB (which is also highly heterogeneous), including areas of well-differentiated fetal, crowded fetal, embryonal, and blastemal HB. Our goal was to investigate how coactivation of YAP1 and β-catenin drive the dedifferentiation of hepatocytes into hepatoblast-like tumor cells over time, leading to HB tumors. In order to measure changes in gene expression during tumorigenesis in our model, we used an Affymetrix microarray to analyze isolated RNA from wild type FVB mouse livers, mouse HB tumor tissue, and non-tumor liver tissue adjacent to HB tumors.

DESIGN
We extracted RNA from wild type liver tissue from FVB mice (3 biological replicates), tissue from HB liver tumors in our mouse model (10 biological replicates at different time points), and non-tumor tissue adjacent to early HB tumors (3 biological replicates). We included a range of tumor samples from a variety of time points ranging from 4 weeks (small early tumors) to 10 weeks (large late tumors) post-plasmid administration, in order to capture in broad terms the evolution of the HB tumors.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T
