TITLE
Gene expression profiling of porcine skeletal muscle satellite cells after poly (I:C) challenge

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
Skeletal muscle satellite cells, also known as muscle stem cells, play a vital role in the construction, development, and self-renewal of skeletal muscle in vertebrate animals. Numerous of expressed genes during proliferation and differentiation periods of porcine satellite cells has have been investigated in the previous study. However, the knowledge about gene expression of satellite cells undergoing pathological condition is necessary to extend. In this study, we conducted to expose porcine muscle satellite cells under mimic of viral infection (poly (I:C)) condition through proliferation and differentiation time points, and analyzed next generation sequencing to find differentially expressed genes (DEGs) which regulated porcine satellite cells in these stages. The comparison of RNA libraries revealed 406 DEGs (414 transcriptions) (q < 0.05 and log2 fold change ≥ 1.5) from 4 comparison libraries including treated 0h – 12h, treated 12h – 24h, treated 0h – 24h and untreated 24h – 48h. In treated poly (I:C) condition during proliferation stage, the up-regulated genes related to immune response were highly expressed, while the genes involved in muscle development were higher expressed in untreated than in treated poly (I:C) condition during differentiation time. The functional pathways associated to Influenza A, Toll-like signaling as well as chemokine signaling were revealed during exposing poly (I:C) condition of porcine satellite cells. Our finding not only suggests that porcine satellite cells could induce immune barrier to self-protect and self-renewal after suffering virus infection but also expands knowledge of expressed genes and pathways to understand about the infiltrated mechanism of the virus into porcine satellite cells.

DESIGN
mRNA profiles of untreated and treated poly (I:C) conditions were generated by sequencing, in triplicate, using Illumina Hiseq 4000 platform.

PLATFORM
GPL22475 Illumina HiSeq 4000 (Sus scrofa)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .
