TITLE
Microarray analysis identifies candidate genes for key roles in coral development

ORGANISM
Acropora millepora

SUMMARY
Background: Anthozoan cnidarians are amongst the simplest animals at the tissue level of organization, but are surprisingly complex and vertebrate-like in terms of gene repertoire. As major components of tropical reef ecosystems, the stony corals are anthozoans of particular ecological significance. To better understand the molecular bases of both cnidarian development in general and coral-specific processes such as skeletogenesis and symbiont acquisition, microarray analysis was carried out through the period of early development – when skeletogenesis is initiated, and symbionts are first acquired. Methodology/ Principal Findings: Of approximately 5600 unique genes represented on the microarrays, 1084 were differentially expressed (P < 0.05) in comparisons between four different stages of coral development, spanning key developmental transitions. Genes of likely relevance to the processes of settlement, metamorphosis, calcification and interaction with symbionts were characterised further and their spatial expression patterns investigated using whole-mount in situ hybridisation. Conclusions/Significance: This study is the first large-scale investigation of developmental gene expression for any cnidarian, and has provided candidate genes for key roles in many aspects of coral biology, including calcification, metamorphosis and symbiont uptake. One surprising finding is that some of these genes have clear counterparts in higher animals but are not present in the closely-related sea anemone Nematostella. A second conclusion is that coral-specific processes (i.e. traits which distinguish corals from their close relatives) may be analogous to similar processes in distantly related organisms. This first large-scale application of microarray analysis demonstrates the potential of this approach for investigating many aspects of coral biology, including the effects of stress and disease. Keywords: developmental

DESIGN
Four developmental stages of Acropora millepora were compared - prawnchip, presettlement, postsettlement and adult.  Each was compared to every other 4 times; twice in one dye orientation and twice in the other (complete block design)

PLATFORM
GPL6774 Acropora millepora_13KcDNA_v1.0

CITATIONS
19014561

