TITLE
Genome-Wide Mapping and Interrogation of the Nmp4 Antianabolic Bone Axis 

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
PTH is an osteoanabolic for treating osteoporosis but its potency wanes. Disabling the transcription factor nuclear matrix protein 4 (Nmp4) in healthy, ovary-intact mice enhances bone response to PTH and bone morphogenetic protein 2 and protects from unloading-induced osteopenia. These Nmp4-/- mice exhibit expanded bone marrow populations of osteoprogenitors and supporting CD8+ T cells. To determine whether the Nmp4-/- phenotype persists in an osteoporosis model we compared PTH response in ovariectomized (ovx) wild-type (WT) and Nmp4-/- mice. To identify potential Nmp4 target genes, we performed bioinformatic/pathway profiling onNmp4chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) data. Mice (12 weeks old) were ovx or sham operated 4 weeks before the initiation of PTH therapy. Skeletal phenotype analysis included microcomputed tomography, histomorphometry, serum profiles, fluorescence-activated cell sorting and the growth/mineralization of cultured WT and Nmp4-/- bone marrow mesenchymal stem progenitor cells (MSPCs). ChIP-seq data were derived using MC3T3-E1 preosteoblasts, murine embryonic stem cells, and 2 blood cell lines. Ovx Nmp4-/- mice exhibited an improved response to PTH coupled with elevated numbers of osteoprogenitors and CD8+ T cells, but were not protected from ovx-induced bone loss. Cultured Nmp4-/- MSPCs displayed enhanced proliferation and accelerated mineralization. ChIP-seq/gene ontology analyses identified target genes likely under Nmp4 control as enriched for negative regulators of biosynthetic processes. Interrogation of mRNA transcripts in nondifferentiating and osteogenic differentiating WT and Nmp4-/- MSPCs was performed on 90 Nmp4 target genes and differentiation markers. These data suggest that Nmp4 suppresses bone anabolism, in part, by regulating IGF-binding protein expression. Changes in Nmp4 status may lead to improvements in osteoprogenitor response to therapeutic cues.

DESIGN
MC3T3-E1 subclone 4, PTH therapy, Nmp4 chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) Cells from ATCC (MC3T3-E1 subclone 4) were maintained in a-MEM supplemented with 100-IU/mL penicillin, 100-µg/mL streptomycin, 25-µg/mL amphotericin, 2mM L-glutamine (Gibco BRL), ascorbic acid (50 µg/mL; Sigma-Aldrich), and 10% fetal bovine serum (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were seeded into twenty-one 150-mm plates at an initial density of 50,000 cells/plate (320 cells/cm2) and maintained in a-MEM complete medium plus ascorbic acid. On day 14 post-seeding, cells were treated with 25nM hPTH (1–34) or vehicle control for 1 hour before harvest.

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .
