TITLE
Comparison of adult intact naive C57Bl/6 Nogo-A KO versus WT spinal cord

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Nogo-A localized on myelin adaxonal membrane in the adult CNS is well known for its role as neurite outgrowth inhibitor following a lesion. Nogo-A KO mice show enhanced regenerative/compensatory fiber growth following CNS lesion. However, changes undergoing in their intact CNS have not been studied. Moreover, Nogo-A in the intact adult CNS in also expressed in some neuronal subpopulations, e.g. in the hippocampus, olfactory bulbs and dorsal root ganglia. We compared the intact adult CNS (spinal cord) of Nogo-A KO mice in order to identify: potential compensating molecules which could be interesting new inhibitory neurite outgrowth candidates, possible molecules involved in the up to now not yet clarified downstream signalling pathway of Nogo-A, additional new functions for myelin or neuronal Nogo-A in the intact adult CNS. Keywords: gene expression, Nogo-A KO, spinal cord, adult, naive, unlesioned

DESIGN
Spinal cords from 3 adult C57Bl/6 wild type and Nogo-A KO mice have been explanted. Total RNA has been extracted and processed for hybridization on Mouse 430 2.0 Affymetrix GeneChips. Following scanning and first analysis with MAS 5.0, further analysis was performed by GeneSpring 7.2 (Silicon Genetics, Redwood City, CA). A present call filter (2 out of 3 present calls in at least one out of the different studied conditions) was applied. Normalization was run per chip as well as per gene to the median of the control replicates. Data were statistical restricted through a 1-way Anova (p=0.05). A final threshold of =1.2 folds of increase or decrease in the expression level of each single transcript was applied. Regulated transcripts have been assigned to functional categories according to GeneOntology as well as literature and database mining (Pubmed and Bioinformatics Harvester EMBL Heidelberg).

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

