TITLE
Multiwalled carbon nanotube-induced pulmonary inflammatory and fibrotic responses and genomic changes following aspiration exposure in mice: A 1-year postexposure study.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Pulmonary exposure to multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) induces an inflammatory and rapid fibrotic response, although the long-term signaling mechanisms are unknown. The aim of this study was to examine the effects of 1, 10, 40, or 80 µg MWCNT administered by pharyngeal aspiration on bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid for polymorphonuclear cell (PMN) infiltration, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity, and lung histopathology for inflammatory and fibrotic responses in mouse lungs 1 mo, 6 mo, and 1 yr postexposure. Further, a 120-µg crocidolite asbestos group was incorporated as a positive control for comparative purposes. Results showed that MWCNT increased BAL fluid LDH activity and PMN infiltration in a dose-dependent manner at all three postexposure times. Asbestos exposure elevated LDH activity at all 3 postexposure times and PMN infiltration at 1 mo and 6 mo postexposure. Pathological changes in the lung, the presence of MWCNT or asbestos, and fibrosis were noted at 40 and 80 µg MWCNT and in asbestos-exposed mice at 1 yr postexposure. To determine potential signaling pathways involved with MWCNT-associated pathological changes in comparison to asbestos, up- and down-regulated gene expression was determined in lung tissue at 1 yr postexposure. Exposure to MWCNT tended to favor those pathways involved in immune responses, specifically T-cell responses, whereas exposure to asbestos tended to favor pathways involved in oxygen species production, electron transport, and cancer. Data indicate that MWCNT are biopersistent in the lung and induce inflammatory and fibrotic pathological alterations similar to those of crocidolite asbestos, but may reach these endpoints by different mechanisms.

DESIGN
We evaluated bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid for polymorphonuclear cell (PMN) infiltration and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity, and lung histopathology for inflammatory and fibrotic responses in mouse lungs after 1 year post-exposure to a dispersion media (DM) control (Porter et al., 2008); 1, 10, 40, or 80 g MWCNT; or 120 g crocidolite asbestos by pharyngeal aspiration. Additionally, we determined gene expression changes in mouse lung tissue with increasing doses of MWCNT at 1 year post-exposure to determine potential underlying mechanisms of fibrotic signaling after exposure to MWCNT.

PLATFORM
GPL17400 [MoGene-2_1-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 2.1 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
27092743

MICROARRAYP
T
