TITLE
Transcriptional gene profile of peripheral blood derived mesenchymal stromal cells from GFP transgenic rat

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Using culture conditions similar to those defined for bone marrow derived mesenchymal stromal cells (BMMSCs), peripheral blood derived mesenchymal stromal cells (PBMSCs) from green fluorescent protein (GFP) transgenic rats were isolated and expanded. Despite the highly similar profile in the putative mesenchymal characteristics including fibroblastic morphology, molecular markers such as CD90, CD44, CD106, vimentin, etc., osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation potentials, significant differential expression between PBMSCs and BMMSCs was discovered in 167 genes by Affymetrix microarray. Of the 167 sequences, were there 81 genes up-regulated and 86 genes down-regulated in the PBMSCs vs BMMSCs. The gene ontological (GO) analysis further revealed that ontology terms such as cell differentiation, development, cell communication, extracellular region, etc., were significantly enriched in these 167 genes, implying potential different biological function of PBMSCs from their counterpart BMMSCs. These genes and associated proteins may also be used as markers for defining PBMSCs from BMMSCs, and more important, may provide further direction to study this elusive cell population. Keywords: mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs), peripheral blood (PB), bone marrow (BM), green fluorescent protein (GFP) transgenic rat, microarray

DESIGN
Using the same culture conditions, 3 paired PBMSCs and BMMSCs were obtained from 3 different GFP rats. Total cellular RNA of the passage 2 cells was isolated using a total RNA extraction mini kit and processed for the comparative gene expression profile study. Thus, within the total 6 hybridizations, there were 2 comparative groups containing 3 samples in each and each of the 3 samples in one group were paired with one of the other 3 samples in the other group.

PLATFORM
GPL341 [RAE230A] Affymetrix Rat Expression 230A Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

