TITLE
Activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) are relatively easily obtainable cells in humans. Gene expression profiles of PBMCs have been shown to reflect the pathological and physiological state of a person. Recently, we showed that the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARα) has a functional role in human PBMCs during fasting. However, the extent of the role of PPARα in human PBMCs remains unclear. In this study, we therefore performed gene expression profiling of PBMCs incubated with the specific PPARα ligand WY14,643. Results: Incubation of PBMCs with WY14,643 for 12 hours resulted in a differential expression of 1,373 of the 13,080 genes expressed in the PBMCs. Gene expression profiles showed a clear individual response to PPARα activation between six healthy human blood donors, which was not the result of the nutritional status of the donors. Pathway analysis showed that genes in fatty acid metabolism, primarily in β-oxidation were up-regulated upon activation of PPARα with WY14,643, and genes in several amino acid metabolism pathways were down-regulated. Conclusions: This study shows that PPARα in human PBMCs regulates fatty acid and amino acid metabolism. In addition, PBMC gene expression profiles show individual responses to WY14,643 activation. We show that PBMCs are a suitable model to study changes in PPARα activation in healthy humans. Keywords: metabolic state analysis

DESIGN
PBMCs from six healthy Caucasian male blood donors, aged between 30 and 48 yr, were isolated directly after arrival of the buffy coat (max. 8 hours after donation) by Ficol-paque Plus density gradient centrifugation (Amersham Biosciences, Roosendaal, the Netherlands). PBMCs were incubated in RPMI1640 medium with 2 mmol/L L-glutamine, 10% fetal bovine serum and antibiotics (penicillin and streptomycin) in the presence of 5% CO2 at 37°C. at 1.0 x 106 cells per ml with either WY14,643 (50 μM) or vehicle (DMSO, 0.1%) for 12 hours. Total RNA from PBMCs was labeled using a one-cycle cDNA labeling kit (Affymetrix Inc, Santa Clara, CA) and hybridized to Affymetrix Human whole genome U133 plus 2.0 arrays (Affymetrix). Sample labeling, hybridization to chips and image scanning was performed according to the manufacturer’s GeneChip Expression Analysis Technical Manual (Affymetrix).

PLATFORM
GPL6791 Affymetrix GeneChip Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array [CDF: Hs_ENTREZG_10]

CITATIONS
18518955

