TITLE
Mutational and Transcriptional Landscape of Spontaneous Gene Duplications and Deletions in Caenorhabditis elegans

ORGANISM
Caenorhabditis elegans

SUMMARY
Gene duplication and deletion are pivotal processes shaping the structural and functional repertoire of genomes, with implications for disease, adaptation and evolution. We employed an experimental evolution framework partnered with high-throughput genomics to assess the molecular and transcriptional characteristics of novel gene copy-number variants (CNVs) in Caenorhabditis elegans populations subjected to varying intensity of selection. Here, we report a direct spontaneous genome-wide rate of gene duplication of 2.9 × 10-5 /gene/generation in C. elegans, the highest for any species to date. The increase in average transcript abundance of new duplicates arising under minimal selection is significantly greater than two-fold compared to single-copies of the same gene, suggesting that genes in segmental duplications are frequently overactive at inception. The average increase in transcriptional activity of gene duplicates is greater in MA lines that passed through single individual bottlenecks than in MA lines with larger population bottlenecks.  Furthermore, there is an inverse relationship between the ancestral transcription levels of newly originating gene duplicates and population size, with duplicate copies of highly expressed genes less likely to accumulate in larger populations. The results demonstrate that there is a fitness cost of superfluous gene expression and purifying selection against new gene duplicates. However, on average, duplications also provide a significant increase in gene expression that can facilitate adaptation to novel environmental challenges.

DESIGN
Experimental evolution study of 35 mutation accumulation lines descendant from a common ancestor: Twenty lines of size N = 1, ten lines of population size N = 10, and five lines of population size N = 100 are compared to their ancestor after up to 409 generations of mutation accumulation.

PLATFORM
GPL20029 NimbleGen C. elegans 120618_Cele_WS230_JK_CGH

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T
