TITLE
Transcriptional Response of 0.1%YE-grown M. sedula cells to ferrous sulfate

ORGANISM
Metallosphaera sedula

SUMMARY
(from abstract): Iron oxidation is a desirable trait of biomining microorganisms, although the mechanism is not well-understood in extreme thermoacidophiles. The complete genome sequence of the extremely thermoacidophilic archaeon Metallosphaera sedula DSM 5348 (2.2 Mb, ~2300 ORFs) provides insights into biologically catalyzed metal sulfide oxidation. Comparative genomics was used to identify pathways and proteins (in)directly involved with bioleaching. As expected, the M. sedula genome encodes genes related to autotrophic carbon fixation, metal tolerance, and adhesion. Also, terminal oxidase cluster organization indicates the presence of hybrid quinol-cytochrome oxidase complexes. Comparisons with the mesophilic biomining bacterium Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 indicate that the M. sedula genome encodes at least one putative rusticyanin, involved in iron oxidation. The fox gene cluster, involved in iron oxidation in the thermoacidophilic archaeon Sulfolobus metallicus, could also be identified. These iron-oxidizing components are missing from genomes of non-leaching Sulfolobales like Sulfolobus solfataricus P2 and Sulfolobus acidocaldarius DSM 639. Whole genome transcriptional response analysis showed that 88 ORFs were up-regulated 2-fold or more in M. sedula upon addition of ferrous sulfate to yeast extract-based medium; these included components of terminal oxidase clusters predicted to be involved with iron oxidation, as well as genes predicted to be involved with sulfur metabolism. Many hypothetical proteins were also differentially transcribed, indicating that aspects of the iron and sulfur metabolism of M. sedula remain to be identified and characterized. Keywords: substrate response

DESIGN
Dye flip of Mse cells includes two samples, yeast exact (YE) and yeast extract + ferrous sulfate (YEF). The first slide, Y3F5, has YE RNA labeled with cy3 and YEF RNA labeled with cy5, while the second slide, F3Y5, has YEF RNA labeled with cy3 and YE RNA labeled with cy5. YE serves as the reference condition, with the expectation that ORFs involved with Fe2+ oxidation (and SO4 metabolism) will be upregulated on YEF (log2 fold change of YE-YEF < -1).

PLATFORM
GPL6785 NCSU_Metallosphaera sedula_2Karray_version1

CITATIONS
18083856

