TITLE
Developmental origins of pathological heterogeneity associated with ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC) is a rare cardiomyopathy associated with a hypertrabeculated phenotype and a large spectrum of symptoms. The developmental origins and mechanistic basis of varying severity of this pathology are unknown. To investigate these issues, we inactivated the cardiac transcription factor Nkx2-5 in trabecular myocardium at different stages of trabecular morphogenesis.  Conditional deletion of Nkx2-5 at embryonic stages, during trabecular formation, provokes a severe hypertrabeculated phenotype associated with subendocardial fibrosis and   Purkinje fiber hypoplasia. A milder phenotype was observed after Nkx2-5 deletion at fetal stages, during trabecular compaction. A longitudinal study of cardiac function in adult Nkx2-5 conditional mutant mice demonstrates that excessive trabeculation is associated with complex ventricular conduction defects, progressively leading to strain defects, and, in 50% of mutant mice, to heart failure. Progressive impaired cardiac function correlates with conduction and strain defects independently of the degree of hypertrabeculation. Transcriptomic analysis of molecular pathways reflects myocardial remodeling with a larger number of differentially expressed genes in the severe versus mild phenotype and identifies Six1 as a marker upregulated in hypertrabeculated hearts.  Our results provide insights into the etiology of LVNC and link its pathogenicity with compromised trabecular development including compaction defects and ventricular conduction system hypoplasia.

DESIGN
Fifty mice were assigned to three groups: Nkx2-5Δtrab mice received tamoxifen injections at embryonic stages (E10.5 and E11.5), Nkx2-5Δcomp mice received tamoxifen injections at fetal stages (E13.5 and E14.5), and control mice without tamoxifen injection. For transcriptomic analyse, n=4 per group at 6 month-old mutant mice.

PLATFORM
GPL13912 Agilent-028005 SurePrint G3 Mouse GE 8x60K Microarray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T
