TITLE
ELAV-like protein HuD overexpression and pulldown (perro-affy-mouse-482241)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Post-transcriptional mechanisms play an important role in the control of gene expression. RNA-binding proteins are key players in the post-transcriptional control of many neural genes and they participate in multiple processes, from RNA splicing and mRNA transport to mRNA stability and translation. Our laboratory has developed the first mouse model overexpressing a RNA-binding protein, the ELAV-like protein HuD, in the CNS under the control of the CaMKinII alpha promoter. Initial behavioral characterization of the mice revealed that they had significant learning deficits together with abnormalities in prepulse inhibition (PPI). At the molecular level, we found that the expression of the growth-associated protein GAP-43, one of the targets of HuD, was increased in the hippocampus of HuD transgenic mice. Besides binding and stabilizing the GAP-43 mRNA, HuD was shown to bind in vitro or in vivo the mRNAs of acetylcholinesterase, tau, p21, neuroserpin, and MARCKS among others.  To identify additional targets of HuD, we propose to pull down the RNAs bound to myc-tagged HuD in vivo in the brains of HuD transgenic mice, to isolate these bound RNAs and use these to probe DNA microarrays. We will use pull downs using non-immune IgGs as controls. To test our hypothesis we propose 2 specific aims: 1) To identify the targets of HuD in HuD overexpressor mice and 2) To compare these target mRNAs to those we identified  previously  as having increased levels of expression in the hippocampus of HuD transgenic mice (see protocol # Perrone-Bizzozero-5R01NS030255-12) and/or those that show increased expression in dentate granule cells of HuD transgenic mice ( protocol # perro-affy-mouse-309741) Based upon the role of the RNA-binding HuD in neuronal development and synaptic plasticity, we expect that HuD targets will include mRNAs for proteins involved in these processes. All mice are in C57BL/6 background and are male approximately 60 days old. To identify target of HuD in our transgenic mice, we will homogenize the homogenize the hippocampi  (2 per animal) of 3 transgenic mice and use these protein extracts for immunoprecipitation assays. Briefly, transgenic myc-tagged HuD protein will be immunoprecipitated using myc-tag antibodies and protein-G agarose beads and samples will be sent to T-Gen for RNA isolation, single round amplification and probing of DNA microarrays. We will use non-immune IgG as a negative control. Conditions: Pooled Extracts from 3 transgenic mice IP with myc-tag antibodies: Triplicates Pooled extract from 3 transgenic mice IP with non-immune IgGs (negative control): duplicates Keywords: dose response

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

