TITLE
Expression data from murine mice microglia treated with Glioma Conditioned Medium for 6h

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Immune cells accumulating in the microenvironment of malignant tumors are tumor-educated, and contribute to its growth, progression and evasion of antitumor immune responses. Glioblastoma (GBM), the common and most malignant primary brain tumor in adults, shows considerable accumulation of resident microglia and peripheral macrophages, and their polarization into tumor-supporting cells. There are controversies regarding a functional phenotype of glioma-associated microglia/macrophages (GAMs) due to a lack of consistent markers. Previous categorization of GAM polarization towards the M2 phenotype has been found inaccurate because of oversimplification of highly complex and heterogeneous responses. In this study we characterized functional responses and gene expression in mouse and human microglial cultures exposed to fresh conditioned media (GCM) from human U87 and LN18 glioma cells. Functional analyses revealed mutual communication reflected by strong stimulation of glioma invasion by microglial cells and increased microglial phagocytosis after GCM treatment. To define transcriptomic markers of GCM-activated microglia, we performed selected and global gene expression analyses of stimulated microglial cells. We found activated pathways associated with immune-evasion and TGF signaling. We performed computational comparison of the expression patterns of GAMs from human GBMs and rodent experimental gliomas to select genes consistently changed in different datasets. The analyses of marker genes in GAMs from different experimental models and clinical samples revealed only a small set of common genes, which reflects variegated responses in clinical and experimental settings. We discuss potential sources of the observed differences and stress a great need for definitive elucidation of a functional state of GAMs.

DESIGN
Primary mouse microglia was obtained from the neonatal cortical primary cultures (P0-P2). Microglia cells were seeded and stimulated with fresh Glioma Conditioned Medium (GCM) for 6h and RNA was collected. The study includes three biological replicates derived from seperate cortical cultures.

PLATFORM
GPL11180 [HT_MG-430_PM] Affymetrix HT MG-430 PM Array Plate

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T
