TITLE
Enhanced wound healing of tissue-engineered human corneas through altered phosphorylation of the CREB and AKT signal transduction pathways

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The cornea is a transparent organ, highly specialized and unique that is continually subjected to abrasive forces and occasional mechanical or chemical trauma because of its anatomical localization. Upon injury, the extracellular matrix (ECM) rapidly changes to promote wound healing through integrin-dependent activation of specific signal transduction mediators whose contribution is to favor faster closure of the wound by altering the adhesive and migratory properties of the cells surrounding the damaged area. In this study, we exploited the human tissue-engineered cornea (hTECs) as a model to study the signal transduction pathways that participate to corneal wound healing. By exploiting both gene profiling and activated kinases arrays, we could demonstrate the occurrence of important alterations in the level of expression and activation of a few mediators from the PI3K/Akt and CREB pathways in response to the ECM remodeling taking place during wound healing of damaged hTECs. Pharmacological inhibition of CREB with C646 considerably accelerated wound closure compared to controls. This process was considerably accelerated further when both C646 and SC79, an Akt agonist, were added together to wounded hTECs. Therefore, our study demonstrate that proper corneal wound healing requires the activation of Akt together with the inhibition of CREB and that wound healing in vitro can be altered by the use of pharmacological inhibitors (such as C646) or agonists (such as SC79) of these mediators.

DESIGN
Comparison of biopsies taken from the central (wound) and external (control) sections of human tissue-engineered corneas made with 3 population of human epithelial cells (epi44, epi52 and epi71b).

PLATFORM
GPL24914 Agilent-028004 SurePrint G3 Human GE 8x60K Microarray (Gene Name Version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T
