TITLE
Characterization of the SigB-PrfA regulatory network in Listeria monocytogenes

ORGANISM
Listeria monocytogenes

SUMMARY
Listeria monocytogenes SigB and PrfA are pleiotropic regulators of stress response and virulence gene expression, which have been shown to co-regulate genes in L. monocytogenes.  We performed whole genome transcriptional profiling in the presence of PrfA* and active SigB, to identify the overlaps between the PrfA virulence regulon and the SigB stress response regulon. In L. monocytogenes, the PrfA* allele contributes to the activation of virulence genes to a level comparable to that of intracellular growing L. monocytogenes. Our results showed that the core PrfA regulon consists of 12 genes previously described as PrfA regulated.  Furthermore, we found that the role of SigB during virulence gene regulation changes, dependent on the presence or absence of PrfA*. In the absence of PrfA*, SigB activated the transcription of virulence genes such as inlA and inlB. In the presence of PrfA*, SigB negatively influenced the transcription of genes in the PrfA core regulon.  The observed effect of SigB on the transcript level of PrfA regulated genes was shown to reduce the cytotoxic effect of the PrfA* allele in HepG-2 cells.  Our results indicate that the SigB-PrfA regulatory network is important for the adjustment of virulence gene transcription to ensure L. monocytogenes success as an intracellular pathogen. Keywords: comparison of gene expression of regulatory mutants

DESIGN
The experimental design included 4 mutant strains of L. monocytogenes 10403S (PrfA*, delta prfA, delta prfA delta sigB, and PrfA* delta sigB), of which cDNA generated from 4 biological replicates were hybridized in all possible pairwise comparisons.  Data were analyzed using a one way ANOVA in R/MAANOVA to determine significant differences in gene expression among the different strains.  A two way ANOVA implemented in R/MAANOVA determined significant differences in gene expression due to the presence or absence of SigB and PrfA.

PLATFORM
GPL5029 CUFSL Listeria 6K oligonuclotide array v1.0

CITATIONS
19255187

