TITLE
Lifestyle of lactobacillus plantarum in the mouse cecum

ORGANISM
Lactobacillus plantarum WCFS1

SUMMARY
Lactobacillus plantarum is a common inhabitant of mammalian gastrointestinal tracts and specific strains belonging to this species are marketed as probiotics intended to confer beneficial health effects. To assist in determining the physiological status and host-microbe interactions of L. plantarum in the digestive tract we assessed changes in the transcriptome of L. plantarum WCFS1 during colonization of the cecum of germ-free mice. According to the transcript profiles L. plantarum WCFS1 was metabolically active and not under severe stress in this intestinal compartment. Carbohydrate metabolism was the most strongly affected functional gene category whereby many genes encoding diverse sugar transport and degradation pathways were induced in mice even compared to L. plantarum grown in a mouse chow-derived laboratory medium. This suggests that the ability of L. plantarum WCFS1 to consume diverse energy sources including plant-associated and host-derived carbohydrates was increased during its residence in the digestive tract. Many of these genes were also induced in L. plantarum colonizing germ-free mice fed a humanized Western-style diet. Similarly a core set of genes encoding cell surface-related properties were differentially expressed in mice. This set includes genes required for the D-alanylation and glycosylation of lipoteichoic acids that were strongly down-regulated in mice. In total L. plantarum exhibits a distinct in vivo transcriptome directed towards adaptation to the mouse intestinal environment. Keywords: cell type comparison

DESIGN
Six-week old germ-free C57 Black-6 male mice were inoculated with a single dose of 109 CFU of exponential-phase L. plantarum WCFS1 cells. The mice were sacrificed 15 days later, after sufficient time had passed for several turnovers of the intestinal epithelium and its overlying mucosal layer. Four mice were fed on Chow diet and two mice were fed on western style diet. RNA was isolated from the cecum of these mice. The transcriptome of L. plantarum in these mice was compared to that of L. plantarum grown on MRS broth, Chow broth, or on chemically defined media with either glucose or lactose as carbon- and energy source.

PLATFORM
GPL4318 WCFS Lactobacillus plantarum 11K 60-mer array, Version 1, our ID LPAG1

CITATIONS
19638173

