TITLE
Gene expression in murine memory versus naive B cells (1st generation and 2nd generation screens)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Memory B cells play essential roles in the maintenance of long-term immunity and may be important in the pathogenesis of autoimmune disease, but how these cells are distinguished from their naïve precursors is poorly understood. To address this, it would be important to understand how gene expression differs between memory and naive B cells in order to elucidate memory-specific functions. Using model systems that help overcome the lack of murine memory-specific markers and the low frequency of antigen-specific memory and naïve cells, we undertook a global comparison of gene expression between memory B cells and their naive precursors. 1st generation screen: These data represent our first generation comparison of gene expression between murine naïve and memory splenic B cells. Naïve NP-binding splenic B cells were FACS purified from unimmunized mVh186.2 transgenic Balb/c mice. Memory B cells were generated by immunizing mVh186.2 transgenic Balb/c mice with 2 doses of NP-CGG in alum delivered i.p. 6 weeks apart. After a minimum of 12-weeks rest, NP-binding splenic B cells were isolated by FACS. Total RNA was extracted, cRNA synthesized and labeled and hybridized to Affymetrix mouse 430 2.0 chips. 2nd generation screen: These data represent our second generation comparison of gene expression between murine naïve and memory splenic B cells. Naïve NP-binding AA4.1neg splenic B cells were FACS purified from unimmunized mVh186.2 transgenic Jk KO Balb/c mice. Memory B cells were generated from these naive precursors after adoptive transfer into recipients that mount poor endogenous NP-responses. 12-weeks post i.p. immunization with NP-CGG in alum, NP-specific splenic memory  B cells  were isolated by FACS. Total RNA was extracted, cRNA synthesized and labeled and hybridized to Affymetrix mouse 430 2.0 chips. Memory/Naïve comparison data linked below as Supplementary files. Keywords: Cell type comparison

