TITLE
Effects of Mediator subunit gene-deletions under conditions that repress ribosome synthesis

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
Transcriptional repression of ribosomal components and tRNAs is coordinately regulated in response to a wide variety of environmental stresses. Part of this response involves the convergence of different nutritional and stress signaling pathways on Maf1, a protein that is essential for repressing transcription by RNA polymerase (pol) III in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Here we identify the functions buffering yeast cells that are unable to down-regulate transcription by RNA pol III. MAF1 genetic interactions identified in screens of non-essential gene-deletions and conditionally-expressed essential genes reveal a highly interconnected network of 64 genes involved in ribosome biogenesis, RNA pol II transcription, tRNA modification, ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis and other processes. A survey of non-essential MAF1 synthetic sick/lethal (SSL) genes identified six gene-deletions that are defective in transcriptional repression of ribosomal protein (RP) genes following rapamycin treatment. This subset of MAF1 SSL genes included MED20 which encodes a head module subunit of the RNA pol II Mediator complex. Genetic interactions between MAF1 and subunits in each structural module of Mediator were investigated to examine the functional relationship between these transcriptional regulators. Gene expression profiling identified a prominent and highly selective role for Med20 in the repression of RP gene transcription following treatments with rapamycin, chlorpromazine and tunicamycin and in post-diauxic cells. In addition, attenuated repression of RP genes by rapamycin was observed in a strain deleted for the Mediator tail module subunit Med16. The data suggest that Mediator and Maf1 function in parallel pathways to negatively regulate RP mRNA and tRNA synthesis. Keywords: genetic modification, stress response

DESIGN
We generated 12 microarray profiles from fluor-reversed replicates of wild-type and med20[delta] strains with or without treatment with rapamycin and under 5 other conditions that repress ribosomal protein gene transcription. The effect of rapamycin on strains deleted for 3 other Mediator subunits was also assessed relative to wild-type.  See Willis et al., (2008) in revision.

PLATFORM
GPL1229 Hughes Lab Saccharomyces cerevisiae cDNA ORF array

CITATIONS
18604275

