TITLE
Phosphate stimulates parathyroid cell proliferation and PTH release in organ cultures of hyperparathyroidism

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The pathogenesis of primary hyperparathyroidism (I-HPT) and secondary hyperparathyroidism (II-PTH) remains to be elucidated. To characterize their pathophysiology, we investigated the effects of calcium and phosphate on cell proliferation and PTH release in an organ culture of parathyroid tissues. Dissected parathyroid tissues obtained from patients with I-HPT (adenoma) or II-PTH (nodular hyperplasia) were precultured on a collagen-coated membrane for 1-4 week. After exchanging the medium for one containing various concentrations of phosphate, PTH release and [3H]thymidine incorporation were studied. In contrast to dispersed parathyroid cells cultured in a monolayer, calcium decreased PTH release in a concentration-dependent manner in parathyroid tissues. Furthermore, when parathyroid tissues obtained from II-PTH were precultured for 1-4 weeks, PTH release and parathyroid cell proliferation were significantly increased in high-phosphate medium. These phosphate effects were also observed to a lesser extent in parathyroid tissues obtained from I-HPT, but there was no significant difference between I-HPT and II-HPT. Microarray analyses revealed that mRNA levels of PTH, CaSR, and VDR were well preserved, and several growth factors (e.g. TGF-beta1-induced protein) were abundantly expressed in II-PTH. Using organ cultures of hyperparathyroid tissues, in which PTH release and CaSR are well preserved for a prolonged period, we have demonstrated that phosphate stimulates parathyroid cell proliferation not only in II-PTH but also in I-HPT. Although the mechanism responsible for phosphate-induced cell proliferation remains to be elucidated, our in vitro findings suggest that both parathyroid tissues preserve to some extent a physiological response system to hyperphosphatemia as observed in normal parathyroid cells. These data will be published in Journal of Bone & Mineral Metabolism. Keywords: Organ culture experiments, dultured in low vs.high phosphate medium

DESIGN
Two conditioned experimets, low vs. high phosphate medium, cultured for 1 and 4 days

PLATFORM
GPL1708 Agilent-012391 Whole Human Genome Oligo Microarray G4112A (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

