TITLE
Direct transcriptional targets of the HHV 8/KSHV Rta Lytic Switch Protein

ORGANISM
Chlorocebus aethiops ; Human gammaherpesvirus 8

SUMMARY
Lytic reactivation from latency is critical for the pathogenesis of KSHV.  We previously demonstrated that the 691 amino acid KSHV Rta transcriptional transactivator is necessary and sufficient to reactivate the virus from latency.  Viral lytic cycle genes, including those expressing additional transactivators and putative oncogenes, are induced in a cascade fashion following Rta expression.  In this study, we sought to define Rta’s direct targets during reactivation by generating a conditionally nuclear variant of Rta. WT Rta protein is constitutively localized to cell nuclei, and contains two putative nuclear localization signals (NLSs).  Only one NLS (NLS-2; aa 516-530) was required for nuclear localization of Rta, and relocalized eGFP exclusively to cell nuclei.   Analyses of Rta NLS mutants demonstrated that proper nuclear localization of Rta was required for transactivation and stimulation of viral reactivation.  Fusion of Rta_NLS-1,2 to the hormone binding domain of the murine estrogen receptor generated a variant of Rta whose nuclear localization and ability to transactivate and induce reactivation were tightly controlled post-translationally by the synthetic hormone tamoxifen.  We used this strategy in KSHV-infected cells treated with protein synthesis inhibitors to identify direct transcriptional targets of Rta.   Only eight KSHV genes were activated by Rta in the absence of de novo protein synthesis.  These direct transcriptional targets of Rta were transactivated to different magnitudes, and included the genes nut-1/PAN, ORF57/Mta, ORF56/Primase, K2/vIL-6, ORF37/SOX, K14/vOX, K9/vIRF1, and ORF52.   Our data suggest that induction of most of the KSHV lytic cycle genes requires additional protein expression post-Rta. Keywords: Comparative transcriptome analysis by oligonucleotide microarray

DESIGN
KSHV infected cells were transfected with empty expression vector or with vector expressing RtadeltaNLS1,2-ER (RtadeltaNLS1,2 fused to murine hormone binding domain of estrogen receptor (ER)).  Cells were treated with 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) to induce nuclear re-localization of Rta fusion protein.  Cells were pre-treated with hygromycin to eliminate de novo cellular and viral protein expression.  Direct transcriptional targets of Rta were identified by comparing Rta +/- 4-OHT to vector (negative control) +/- 4-OHT.

PLATFORM
GPL6852 UMDNJ/Lukac Human herpesvirus 8/107+GAPDH

CITATIONS
18715905

