TITLE
Glycerol metabolism and PrfA activity in Listeria monocytogenes

ORGANISM
Listeria monocytogenes

SUMMARY
Listeria monocytogenes is able to efficiently utilize glycerol as carbon source. In a defined minimal medium the growth rate is similar (during balanced growth) in presence of glycerol as in presence of glucose or cellobiose. Comparative transcriptome analyses of L. monocytogenes showed in the presence of glycerol (compared to glucose and/or cellobiose) high transcriptional upregulation of the known genes involved in glycerol uptake and metabolism (glpFK, glpD). Expression of the genes encoding a second putative glycerol uptake facilitator (GlpF-2) and a second putative glycerol kinase (GlpK-2) was less enhanced under these conditions. GlpK-1 but not GlpK-2 was essential for glycerol catabolism in L. monocytogenes under extracellular conditions, while loss of GlpK-1 affected replication in Caco-2 cells less than loss of GlpK-2 and GlpD. Additional genes whose transcription was higher in presence of glycerol than in presence of glucose and cellobiose included those for two dihydroxyacetone (Dha) kinases and many genes that are under carbon catabolite repression (CCR) control. Transcriptional down-regulation in the presence of glycerol (compared to glucose and cellobiose) was observed for several genes and operons that are positively regulated by glucose, including genes involved in glycolysis, N-metabolism and biosynthesis of branched chain amino acids. The highest transcriptional up-regulation was observed for all PrfA-dependent genes during early and late logarithmic growth in glycerol.  Under these conditions a low level of HPr-Ser-P and a high level of HPr-His-P was present in the cells, suggesting that all EIIA (B) components of the PTS permeases expressed will be phosphorylated. These and other data reported suggest that the phosphorylation state of PTS permeases correlates with PrfA activity. Keywords: Response of Listeria monocytogenes to different carbon sources

DESIGN
A total of four independently isolated RNA samples from each condition at each growth phase were used for the analysis. RNA from two isolations were pooled and hybridized onto two microarray slides with dye swap. Another two microarray slides were hybridized using the same principle. In total, we used four RNAs and four microarray slides to generate 16 replicate expression values for each combination except for the comparison between glucose and cellobiose, phase B where data generated from three microarray slides were used for further analysis

PLATFORM
GPL6846 Listeria monocytogenes 13K I GPL6847 Listeria monocytogenes 14.5K II

CITATIONS
18502850

