TITLE
Transcriptional signatures of BALB/c mouse macrophages housing multiplying Leishmania amazonensis amastigotes

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
In mammals, resident dermal macrophages (MΦs) are subverted by Leishmania (L.) amazonensis amastigotes as host cells permissive for parasite multiplication. These Leishmania are living within a communal parasitophorous vacuole (PV) and are expected to trigger unique MΦ transcriptional signatures. We performed a transcription profiling of mouse MΦs harboring amastigotes to get insights into their reprogramming as host cells for parasite multiplication. BALB/c mouse bone marrow-derived MΦs were either loaded or not with four amastigotes on average. Twenty four hours later, when amastigotes multiply, total RNA from MΦ cultures was prepared, amplified and hybridized onto Affymetrix Mouse430_2 GeneChips®. The outcome recorded a total of 1,248 probe-sets showing significant differential expression. Comparable fold-change values for a handful of genes were obtained between Affymetrix technology and the more sensitive RTqPCR method. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software® pinpointed the up-regulation of the sterol biosynthesis pathway (P-value = 1.31e-02) involving several genes (1.95 to 4.30 fold-change values), and the modulation of various genes involved in polyamine synthesis and in pro/counter-inflammatory signaling. Our findings suggest that amastigotes exploit the MΦ lipid and polyamine pathways to multiply efficiently, and induce a counter-inflammatory environment to expand their dermis niche.

DESIGN
Mice, MΦs and amastigotes: Swiss nu/nu and BALB/c mice were used (following National Scientific Ethics Committee guidelines) for L. amazonensis (LV79 strain, MPRO/BR/1972/M1841) amastigote propagation and to prepare bone marrow-derived MΦs, respectively. Amastigotes were added at a multiplicity of 4 amastigotes per MΦ. Parasite-harboring MΦs ( > 98%; samples I1, I2 and I3) and parasite-free ones (samples UI1, UI2 and UI3) were cultured at 34°C (LV79 permissive temperature) for 24h. Real-time quantitative PCR: Total RNA from various biological samples including those used for hybridization experiments were reverse transcribed into cDNA using random hexamers (Roche Diagnostics) and Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen Life Technologies). RTqPCR was performed using LightCycler-480 system (Roche) with primers designed with LightCycler Probe Design 1.0 software.Target genes primer sequences, amplicon melting temperatures and amplification efficiencies are available upon request. Gene expression analysis using qBase program allowed determining the normalized relative quantities between parasite-free and parasite-harboring MΦs.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19302708

