TITLE
Cardiac muscle ring finger-1 increases susceptibility to heart failure by inhibiting creatine kinase activity in vivo

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Muscle ring finger-1 (MuRF1) is a muscle-specific protein implicated in the regulation of cardiac myocyte size and contractility. MuRF2, a closely related family member, redundantly interacts with protein substrates, and hetero-dimerizes with MuRF1. Mice lacking either MuRF1 or MuRF2 are phenotypically normal whereas mice lacking both proteins develop a spontaneous cardiac and skeletal muscle hypertrophy indicating cooperative control of muscle mass by MuRF1 and MuRF2. In order to identify the role that MuRF1 plays in regulating cardiac hypertrophy in vivo, we created transgenic mice expressing increased amounts of cardiac MuRF1. Adult MuRF1 transgenic (Tg+) hearts exhibited a non-progressive thinning of the left ventricular wall and a concomitant decrease in cardiac function. Experimental induction of cardiac hypertrophy by trans-aortic constriction (TAC) induced rapid failure of MuRF1 Tg+ hearts. Microarray analysis identified that the levels of genes associated with metabolism (and in particular mitochondrial processes) were significantly altered in MuRF1 Tg+ hearts, both at baseline and during the development of cardiac hypertrophy. Surprisingly, ATP levels in MuRF1 Tg+ mice did not differ from wild type mice despite the depressed contractility following TAC. To explain this discrepancy between the ongoing heart failure and maintained ATP levels in MuRF1 Tg+ hearts, we compared the level and activity of creatine kinase (CK) between wild type and MuRF1 Tg+ hearts. Although mCK and CK-M/B protein levels were unaffected in MuRF1 Tg+ hearts, total CK activity was significantly inhibited. We conclude that MuRF1’s inhibition of CK activity leads to increased susceptibility to heart failure following TAC, demonstrating for the first time that MuRF1 regulates cardiac energetics in vivo. Keywords: Genetic modification, physiological manipulation.

DESIGN
Three-condition experiment, MuRF1 Tg+ vs. WT mice. Biological replicates: 4 WT baseline, 3 MuRF1 Tg+ baseline, cardiac overpressure hypertrophy induced by trans-aortic banding at 1 week (3 WT, 3 MurF Tg) and 4 weeks (3 WT, 3 MurF Tg), hearts harvested. One replicate per array.

PLATFORM
GPL2876 Agilent-012799 Mouse Developmental Microarray 44K G2519A Option 002 (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
19498199

