TITLE
Role of HNF4alpha in the adult colon

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background & Aims: HNF4α is an important transcriptional regulator of hepatocyte and pancreatic function. Hnf4α deletion is embryonically lethal with severe defects in visceral endoderm formation, liver maturation and colon development.  However, the precise role of this transcription factor in maintaining homeostasis of the adult intestine remains unclear.  Herein, we aimed to elucidate the adult intestinal functions of Hnf4α.  Methods: A conditional intestinal epithelial Hnf4α knockout mouse was generated.  Histological abnormality of the colonic mucosa was assessed by immunodetection and Western.  Changes in global gene expression and biological network were analyzed.  Results: Hnf4α intestine null mice developed normally until reaching young adulthood. Crypt distortion became apparent in the Hnf4α null colon at 3 months of age followed by focal areas of crypt dropout, increased immune cell infiltrates, crypt hyperplasia and early signs of polyposis later in life.  A gene profiling analysis identified cell death and cell cycle related to cancer as the most significant sets of genes altered in the Hnf4α colon null mice.  Expression levels of the tight junction proteins claudin 4, 8 and 15 were altered early in the colon epithelium of Hnf4α mutants and correlated with increased barrier permeability to a molecular tracer that does not normally penetrate normal mucosa.  Conclusion: These observations support a functional role for Hnf4α in protecting the colonic mucosa against the initiation of the changes resembling inflammatory bowel diseases and polyp formation.

DESIGN
HNF4alpha was conditionally knockout in the mouse epithelial colon with the villin CRE. A total of 3 control and 3 mutant littermates individuals were sacrificed at 1 year of age.  The colon was harvested and Total RNA was isolated from each individuals.  Each RNA sample was independently used to generate probes to screen affymetrix chips.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19898610

