TITLE
Transcriptional profiling differences for articular cartilage and repair tissue in equine joint surface lesions.

ORGANISM
Equus caballus

SUMMARY
Full thickness articular cartilage lesions with penetration into the subchondral bone fill with fibrocartilage-like repair tissue.  However, the repair tissue has compromised structural and biomechanical properties relative to normal articular cartilage.  The objective of this study was to evaluate transcriptome differences between normal articular cartilage and repair tissue.  Bilateral one-cm2 full-thickness lesions were made in the articular surface of the distal femurs of four adult horses followed by subchondral microfracture.  Four months postoperatively, repair tissue from the lesion site and grossly normal articular cartilage from each stifle were collected.  Total RNA was isolated from tissue samples, linearly amplified, and applied to a 9367-probeset equine-specific cDNA microarray.  Eight paired comparisons matched by limb and horse were made with a dye-swap experimental design.  Comparisons were validated by histological analysis and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR).  Statistical analysis revealed 3,327 (35.2%) differentially expressed probesets.  Biomarkers typically associated with normal articular cartilage and fibrocartilage repair tissue corroborate earlier studies.  Other changes in gene expression previously unassociated with cartilage repair were also revealed and validated by qPCR.  The magnitude of divergence in transcriptional profiles between normal chondrocytes and the cells that populate repair tissue reveal substantial functional differences between these two cell populations.  At the four-month postoperative time point, the relative deficiency within repair tissue of transcripts from genes which typically define articular cartilage indicate that while cells occupying the lesion might be of mesenchymal origin, they have not recapitulated differentiation to the chondrogenic phenotype of normal articular chondrocytes.

DESIGN
This is a direct comparison between grossly normal articular cartilage and repair tissue transcriptomes four months postoperatively.  Eight paired comparisons (repair vs. normal) were made from the eight stifles of four horses.  For each comparison of tissues within each limb, a dye-swap was performed.  Thus, a total of 16 slides were analyzed.  Each pair of slides represented a dye-swap comparison of repair tissue and normal cartilage four months postoperatively from each stifle of the 4 horses.

PLATFORM
GPL6423 MacLeod custom equine cartilage cDNA microarray

CITATIONS
19751507

