TITLE
Norepinephrine transporter-deficient neural crest cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background: The goal of this study was to determine the transcriptional consequences of norepinephrine transporter (NET) gene deletion in noradrenergic neuron differentiation. The norepinephrine transporter (NET) is the target of powerful mind-altering substances, such as tricyclic antidepressants and the drug of abuse, cocaine. NET function in adult noradrenergic neurons of the peripheral and central nervous systems is that of a scavenger that internalizes norepinephrine from the synaptic cleft. By contrast, norepinephrine (NE) transport has a different role in embryogenesis. It promotes differentiation of neural crest cells and locus ceruleus progenitors into noradrenergic neurons, whereas NET inhibitors, such as the tricyclic antidepressant desipramine and the drug of abuse, cocaine, inhibit noradrenergic differentiation. While NET structure und regulation of NET function is well described, little is known about downstream targets of NE transport. Results: We have determined by long serial analysis of gene expression (LongSAGE) the gene expression profiles of in vitro differentiating wild type and norepinephrine transporter-deficient (NETKO) neural crest derivatives. Comparison analyses with the wild type library (GSM 105765) have identified a number of important differentially expressed genes, including genes relevant to noradrenergic neuron differentiation and to the phenotype of NETKO mice. Furthermore we have identified novel differentially expressed genes. Conclusions: Loss of NET function during embryonic development deregulates signaling pathways that are critically involved in neural crest formation and noradrenergic neuron differentiation.

DESIGN
The library was constructed from total RNA of 60 neural crest culture at culture day 7. The neural tubes were dissected from E9.5 embryos that lack the norepinephrine transporter gene.

PLATFORM
GPL1349 SAGE:17:NlaIII:Mus musculus

CITATIONS
19356247

