TITLE
EST mining of yellow potato and gene expression profiling of its infection by P. infestans using SAGE - SOLEXA

ORGANISM
Solanum phureja

SUMMARY
The late blight pathogen, Phytophthora infestans has a broad host range within the Solanaceae family, including yellow potato (Solanum phureja). The disease caused by P. infestans in S. phureja is poorly understood and is a major concern in Colombia. Expressed Sequence Tag (EST) libraries obtained from a normalized library constructed from healthy plant tissue revealed high levels of sequence similarity between S. phureja and S. tuberosum. Then, utilizing Serial Analysis of Gene Expression and high-throughput sequencing (SAGE-Solexa), we characterized yellow potato gene expression during infection by P. infestans. Four-week-old yellow potato plants were inoculated with P. infestans and were collected at 12 and 72 hours post inoculation for RNA extraction. We detected differentially expressed genes by comparing inoculated to non-inoculated and resistant to susceptible plants. The discovery and characterization of the proteins mediating this host–pathogen interaction enable the understanding of the pathosystem and is the key for developing resistant plants. Keywords: SAGE-Solexa, inoculation response, transcript profiling, Solanum phureja, Phytophthora infestans

DESIGN
Four-week-old yellow potato (Solanum phureja) plants were inoculated with Phytophthora infestans and were collected and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen at 12 and 72 hours post inoculation, as well as mock inoculated, for RNA extraction. 2 yellow potato cultivars (resistant and susceptible) were used for each experiment. Mock inoculated plants were collected in each replicate. RNA obtained from each of the three biological replicates was pooled to obtain a single RNA sample for each timepoint X cultivar combination. A total of 6 different SAGE libraries were thus obtained. For all libraries, Illumina sequencing was performed at Canada´s Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre.

PLATFORM
GPL6957 SAGE:17:NlaIII:Solanum phureja

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

