TITLE
Tomato root culture and Al treatment

ORGANISM
Solanum lycopersicum

SUMMARY
cDNA microarrays (Tom 1) were used to analyze changes in transcript accumulation in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum cv Money Maker) root cultures under Al-stress (20uM AlK(SO4)2). Out of the 1,362 genes that had significant changes in transcript accumulation (FDR < 0.05), 569 were reduced and 793 were induced. The down-regulated genes included those found in the cell cycle (p34cdc2 protein kinase, cyclin, histone), putriscine synthesis, ABC transporter, germin-like protein. Al-induced genes included glutamate synthase, pectin modification, histidine synthesis, proline synthesis, metallothionein-like protein, multidrug efflux proteins (MATE), ethylene biosynthesis and detoxification proteins. Different isoforms in the multiple gene families of V-ATPase, glutathione transferases and others were either induced or repressed.  A wide array of genes for regulating transcription and translation activities, and signal transduction were also affected.

DESIGN
Tomato (Solanum esculentum Mill cv Money Maker) seeds were surface sterilized by submerging in 50% bleach (sodium hypochloride) for 10 min followed by three washes with sterile distilled water. For seed germination, six clean seeds were placed in a  500ml flask containing 300 ml Modified Magnavaca’s solution (Magnavaca, 1982) adjusted to pH 4.5 and incubated  on a shaker (150rpm) at 25C for four days. Germinating seeds were then transferred to fresh Modified Magnavaca’s solution supplemented with 20μM AlK(SO4)2. Seedlings serving as controls were placed in Magnavaca’s solution without the Al. Cultures were maintained for 12 additional days, the solution was replaced every four days. At the termination of the experiment, root tips of ~1cm in length were dissected and soaked in pre-chilled RNA extraction buffer. Each replicate of treatment/ control has 20 flasks, and root tips (2cm in length) from the 20 flasks were pooled to make one RNA extraction. Six RNA extraction replicates were preformed for Al treated and control tissues.

PLATFORM
GPL5775 CGEP TOM1 Tomato 13.4k cDNA microarray

CITATIONS
Zhou S, Sauve R, Boone B, Levy S. Identification of genes associated with aluminium toxicity in tomato roots using cDNA microarrays. Plant Stress (2008) 2:113-120.

