TITLE
Gliomatosis Cerebri I

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In modern clinical neuro-oncology the pathological diagnoses are very challenging creating significant clinical confusion and affecting therapeutic decisions and prognostic estimation. We investigated whether gene expression profiling, coupled with class prediction methodology, could be used to predict prognosis of gliomatosis cerebri in a more consistent manner then standard pathology. We report the results of a molecular study in  fifty-nine cases of gliomatosis cerebri, correlating these results with prognosis. TP53 and PTEN gene sequences were analyzed and microarray expression profiling were also performed. At the 24 month follow-up, 17 patients were alive, while 42 patients were died. We identified a 23 gene signature able to predict patient prognosis with microarray gene expression profiling. With the aim to produce a prognostication tool useful in clinical investigation we studied the expression of this 23 gene signature by RT-qPCR. Real time expression values relative to these 23 gene features were used to built a prediction method able to distinguish patients with good prognosis (more likely responsive to therapy) from patients with a bad prognosis (more likely irresponsive to therapy). These results demonstrated not only strong association of gene expression patterns with the survival of the patients but also a robust reproducibility of these gene expression– based predictors.

DESIGN
We have analyzed 59 gliomatosis cerebri bioptic tissue comparing them with normal brain tissue derived by non-tumor surrounding tissue or commercial brain tissue. We alternatively labeled test sample and reference with Cy3 and Cy5 so to avoid a systematic bias due to label efficiency. Since the aim of the work was to find a correlation between prognosis and expression profile we considered each sample of a one prognosis group like a replicate of that group. Median survival data allowed us to distinguish 59 gliomatosis cerebri patients in two group: bad prognosis group, counting 42 patients, with a median survival of 14.58 months and good prognosis group with a median survival of 41.20 months. Moreover TP53 and PTEN mutation analysis was performed on this patients. Kaplan-Meier survival curve with log-rank test showed like each prognosis group can be furthermore divided in 2 groups where bad prognosis group patients bringing a mutation in one of the two gene analized or both genes showed the wrong survival. Microarray expression profile follwed by average linkage clustering analysis based on Pearson correlation coefficients was applied to all tissues on the basis of similarity in the expression pattern over all genes. As expected, it yielded two major clusters, one representing the good prognosis group and the other the bad prognosis one. Interesting these cluster are identical to cluster based on survival. Tumour classification based upon WHO 2007.

PLATFORM
GPL6964 Gliomatosis_Homo_sapiens_725

CITATIONS
19517475

