TITLE
Resveratrol Diet Aging (Heart, Liver, Muscle and Fat Tissue)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Resveratrol delays age-related deterioration and mimics transcriptional aspects of dietary restriction without extending lifespan A small molecule that safely mimics the ability of dietary restriction (DR) to delay age-related diseases in laboratory animals is greatly sought after. We and others have shown that resveratrol mimics effects of DR in lower organisms. In mice, we find that resveratrol induces gene expression patterns in multiple tissues that parallel those induced by DR and every-other-day feeding. Moreover, resveratrol-fed elderly mice shows a marked reduction in signs of aging including reduced albuminuria, decreased inflammation and apoptosis in the vascular endothelium, increased aortic elasticity, greater motor coordination, reduced cataract formation, and preserved bone mineral density. However, mice fed a standard diet did not live longer when treated with resveratrol beginning at mid-life. Our findings indicate that resveratrol treatment has a range of beneficial effects in mice but does not increase the longevity of ad libitum-fed animals when started mid-life.

DESIGN
Male C57BL/6NIA mice at 11 months of age were maintained on a standard purified mouse diet (AIN-93G) for one month prior to the start of the experiment. Beginning at one year of age, SD and EOD groups were fed a standard AIN-93G diet or AIN-93G plus 0.01% or 0.04% resveratrol for the duration of the study. Three separate groups were placed on an HC diet (AIN-93G modified by the addition of hydrogenated coconut oil to provide 60% of calories from fat) or HC + 0.01% or 0.04% resveratrol 6 weeks later and remained on those diets throughout the study. SD and HC mice were fed ad libitum. EOD mice were fed ad libitum on alternate days then moved to a separate cage without food for 24 h. Food intake and body weight were measured on a weekly basis for the duration of the study.

PLATFORM
GPL6103 Illumina mouseRef-8 v1.1 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
18599363 , 21803289

