TITLE
Bacillus subtilis 168 cells: wild-type vs. ccpN (non polar)

ORGANISM
Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis str. 168

SUMMARY
Global transcriptional profiling of Bacillus subtilis cells comparing wild-type to a ccpN (yqzB) non polar mutant. Abstract of associated publication (article accepted): The transcriptional regulator CcpN of Bacillus subtilis has been recently characterized as a repressor of two gluconeogenic genes, gapB and pckA, and of a small non-coding regulatory RNA, sr1, involved in arginine catabolism. Deletion of ccpN impairs growth on glucose and strongly alters the distribution of intracellular fluxes, rerouting the main glucose catabolism from glycolysis to the pentose phosphate (PP) pathway. Using transcriptome analysis, we show that during growth on glucose, gapB and pckA are the only protein-coding genes directly repressed by CcpN. By quantifying intracellular fluxes in deletion mutants, we demonstrate that derepression of pckA under glycolytic condition causes the growth defect observed in the ccpN mutant due to extensive futile cycling through the pyruvate carboxylase, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, and pyruvate kinase. Beyond ATP dissipation via this cycle, PckA activity causes a drain on tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates, which we show to be the main reason for the reduced growth of a ccpN mutant. The high flux through the PP pathway in the ccpN mutant is modulated by the flux through the alternative glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenases, GapA and GapB. Strongly increased concentrations of intermediates in upper glycolysis indicate that GapB overexpression causes a metabolic jamming of this pathway and, consequently, increases the relative flux through the PP pathway. In contrast, derepression of sr1, the third known target of CcpN, plays only a marginal role in ccpN mutant phenotypes.

DESIGN
Two-condition experiment, wt vs. ccpN mutant. 4 experiments were performed different days with 3 independent RNA preparations (from separate cultures) and 3 independent sets of macroarrays: Experiment 1 (samples wt1 and ccpN1): total RNA extract1  /  membranes set A Expereince 2 (samples wt2 and ccpN2): total RNA extract 2  /  membranes set A Experiment 3 (samples wt2 and ccpN2): total RNA extract 3   / membranes set B Experiment 4 (samples wt2 and ccpN2): total RNA extract 3   / membranes set C

PLATFORM
GPL188 Sigma Genosys Panorama Bacillus subtilis Gene Array

CITATIONS
18586936

