TITLE
Gene expression changes in primary aortic endothelial cells during expression of dominant negative PPAR gamma (V290M).

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Ligand-mediated activation of the nuclear hormone receptor PPAR gamma lowers blood pressure and improves glucose tolerance in humans.  Two naturally occurring mutations (P467L, V290M) in the ligand binding domain of PPAR gamma have been described in humans that lead to severe insulin resistance and hypertension.  Experimental evidence suggests that these mutant versions of PPAR gamma act in a dominant negative fashion.  To better understand the molecular mechanisms underlying PPAR gamma action in the vasculature, we determined the global gene expression profile in primary aortic endothelial cells in response to endothelial cell specific expression of a dominant negative isoform of PPAR gamma (V290M).

DESIGN
We generated transgenic mice specifically targeting expression of dominant negative human PPAR gamma to the endothelium using an endothelial-specific promoter (vascular endothelial cadherin or CDH5). Primary aortic endothelial cells were isolated from 10 non-transgenic and 10 EC-DN mice by Dominion Pharmakine ( http://www.pharmakine.com/ ).  For each group, 5 cultures of cells were established. Each culture was derived from 2 mice and remained separate from the other cultures. Cellular RNA was prepared using conventional methods and quality was assessed using the Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies). For the microarray hybridizations, RNA from 3 of the cultures in each group was used.  All the microarray procedures were conducted at the University of Iowa DNA Core facility using standard Affymetrix protocols. In brief, approximately 50 ng of total RNA was used as input to a two-step amplification procedure (NuGen, http://www.nugeninc.com/ ) to generate biotin-labeled RNA fragments for hybridization to the Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 array.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
18676352 , 25675995

