TITLE
Chromosomes 6 and 18 Induce Neoplastic Suppression in Epithelial Ovarian Cancer Cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Metaphase comparative genomic hybridisation (CGH) studies indicate that chromosomes 4, 5, 6, 13, 14, 15 and 18 are frequently deleted in primary ovarian cancers (OC). Therefore, we used microcell-mediated chromosome transfer (MMCT) to establish the functional effects of transferring normal copies of these chromosomes into two epithelial OC cell lines. The in vitro neoplastic phenotype (measured as anchorage dependent and independent growth and invasion) was compared between recipient OC cell lines and multiple MMCT hybrids. Chromosomes 6 and 18 showed strong evidence of functional, neoplastic suppression for multiple hybrids in both cell lines. We also found evidence in one cancer cell line suggesting that chromosomes 4, 13 and 14 may also cause functional suppression. Array CGH and microsatellite analyses were used to characterise the extent of genomic transfer in chromosome 6 and 18 hybrids. A 35Mb deletion on chromosome 6 in two hybrids from one cell line mapped the candidate region proximal to 6q15 and distal to 6q22.2; and an approximate 10Mb candidate region spanning the centromere on chromosome 18 was identified in another two hybrids from the other cell line. These data confirm reported functional effects of chromosome 6 in OC cell lines; but to our knowledge, this is the first time that functional suppression for chromosome18 has been reported. This suggests that these chromosomes may harbour genes that behave as tumour suppressors. The future identification of these genes may have a significant impact on the understanding and treatment of the disease and the identification of novel therapeutic targets.

DESIGN
Four clones from chr 6 and chr 18 hybrids that were transferred by MMCT successfully were mapped by CGH microarray to identified transferred regions that induced neoplastic suppression in epithelial ovarian cancer cell lines (TOV21G and TOV112D).

PLATFORM
GPL6853 Mermaid_Human_32K_CGH_v1.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

