TITLE
Identifying alternative hyper-splicing signatures in MG-thymoma by exon arrays

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: The vast majority of human genes (.70%) are alternatively spliced. Although alternative pre-mRNA  processing is modified in multiple tumors, alternative hyper-splicing signatures specific to particular tumor types are still  lacking. Here, we report the use of Affymetrix Human Exon Arrays to spot hyper-splicing events characteristic of myasthenia  gravis (MG)-thymoma, thymic tumors which develop in patients with MG and discriminate them from colon cancer changes.  Methodology/Principal Findings: We combined GO term to parent threshold-based and threshold-independent ad-hoc  functional statistics with in-depth analysis of key modified transcripts to highlight various exon-specific changes. These  denote alternative splicing in MG-thymoma tumors compared to healthy human thymus and to in-house and Affymetrix  datasets from colon cancer and healthy tissues. By using both global and specific, term-to-parent Gene Ontology (GO)  statistical comparisons, our functional integrative ad-hoc method allowed the detection of disease-relevant splicing events.  Conclusions/Significance: Hyper-spliced transcripts spanned several categories, including the tumorogenic ERBB4 tyrosine  kinase receptor and the connective tissue growth factor CTGF, as well as the immune function-related histocompatability  gene HLA-DRB1 and interleukin (IL)19, two muscle-specific collagens and one myosin heavy chain gene; intriguingly, a  putative new exon was discovered in the MG-involved acetylcholinesterase ACHE gene. Corresponding changes in  spliceosome composition were indicated by co-decreases in the splicing factors ASF/SF2 and SC35. Parallel tumor-associated  changes occurred in colon cancer as well, but the majority of the apparent hyper-splicing events were particular to MGthymoma  and could be validated by Fluorescent In-Situ Hybridization (FISH), Reverse Transcription–Polymerase Chain  Reaction (RT-PCR) and mass spectrometry (MS) followed by peptide sequencing. Our findings demonstrate a particular  alternative hyper-splicing signature for transcripts over-expressed in MG-thymoma, supporting the hypothesis that  alternative hyper-splicing contributes to shaping the biological functions of these and other specialized tumors and  opening new venues for the development of diagnosis and treatment approaches Keywords: Disease analysis, Tumor type comparison analysis

DESIGN
4 samples, 2 MG-Thymoma and 2 healthy Thymus are given, male and female in each. CEL files were analyzed to generate both exon-level (probe set) and transcript-level data

PLATFORM
GPL5175 [HuEx-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version] GPL5188 [HuEx-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0 ST Array [probe set (exon) version]

CITATIONS
18545673

