TITLE
Comparison of genome wide binding of S. cerevisiae condensin, topo II and cohesin by ChIP

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
The chromosomal condensin complex gives metaphase chromosomes structural stability. In addition, condensin is required for sister chromatid resolution during their segregation in anaphase. How condensin promotes chromosome resolution is poorly understood. Chromosome segregation during anaphase also fails after inactivation of topoisomerase II (topo II), the enzyme that removes catenation between sister chromatids left behind after completion of DNA replication. This has led to the proposal that condensin promotes DNA decatenation, but direct evidence for this is missing and alternative roles for condensin in chromosome resolution have been suggested. Using the budding yeast rDNA as a model, we now show that anaphase bridges in a condensin mutant are resolved by ectopic expression of a foreign (Chlorella virus) but not endogenous topo II. This suggests that catenation prevents sister rDNA segregation, and that yeast topo II is ineffective in decatenating the locus without condensin. Condensin and topo II colocalize along both rDNA and euchromatin, consistent with coordination of their activities. We investigate the physiological consequences of condensin-dependent rDNA decatenation and find that late decatenation determines the late segregation timing of this locus during anaphase. Regulation of decatenation therefore provides a means to finetune segregation timing of chromosomes in mitosis. Keywords: ChIP-chip, Cell Cycle

DESIGN
Comparison of the chromosomal association pattern of the condensin subunit Brn1 with that of topo II along budding yeast chromosomes. As control, the binding pattern of the cohesin subunit Scc1 is also included. (Figure 2 in the corresponding manuscript depicts the Brn1 association pattern as obtained from averaging two independent biological ChIP experiments C15_IP_2200_NOC and C16_IP_2200.)

PLATFORM
GPL7249 [Sc03b_MF] Affymetrix GeneChip S. cerevisiae Tiling 1.0F Array

CITATIONS
18635352

