TITLE
MSL2 is required for upregulation of male X chromosome but not for expression of autosomal genes

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Drosophila males double transcription of their single X chromosome to equalize X-linked gene expression with females, which carry two X chromosomes. Increased transcription requires the Male-Specific Lethal (MSL) complex. The MSL2 protein is essential component of the MSL complex. MSL2 is the only protein that is strictly limited to males. MSL2 together with MSL1 forms the core of the MSL complex. The global effect of msl2 mutation on gene expression was measured by microarray analysis. We found that expression of the X chromosome was decreased in msl21 male larvae, supporting the involvement of MSL2 in the up-regulation of X-linked genes. However, there was no change in expression of 4th chromosomal and heterochromatic genes. This finding is broadly comparable to reports of reduced X chromosome expression following msl2 RNAi knockdown in S2 cells. Hence MSL2 is required for up-regulation of male X chromosome where as it is not necessary for normal expression of 4th chromosomal genes and heterochromatic genes in Drosophila melanogaster males.

DESIGN
Total RNA was prepared from groups of 50 (or more in case of smaller larvae) third instar larvae by TRIzol (Invitrogen) extraction and purified using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen). Three independent RNA preparations for each genotype served as templates for probe synthesis. Affymetrix Drosophila Genome 2.0 chips were hybridized to these probes (Santa Clara, CA). Affymetrix Gene expression data was background corrected, normalized and summarized into a one expression value per sample and probeset using the RMA (robust multi-array average) algorithm.  Changes in gene expression (log2 fold changes) were determined by comparing the mean RMA expression values in the msl21 sample to the mean RMA expression values in the msl21/+ samples.

PLATFORM
GPL1322 [Drosophila_2] Affymetrix Drosophila Genome 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19307603

