TITLE
Transcription profiling of PhoP-regulon members under low Mg2+ Ca2+ condition of Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae PXO99A

ORGANISM
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae PXO99A

SUMMARY
In bacteria, two-component regulatory system (TCSs) is generally characterized by a simple phosphotransfer scheme, composed of a sensor domain (a histidine kinase) and a  response domain (a response regulator), which is responsible for detection of external stimuli. PhoP-PhoQ TCS of Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo), a causal agent of bacterial leaf blight disease in rice, was previously shown to be negatively regulated by RaxR-RaxH, another TCS that senses population cell density as well as modulates the activity of AvrXA21,  a bacterial effector, recognized by a bacterial blight resistance gene, Xa21. In this work, whole-genome microarray was performed to analyze transcription profiling and identify member of PhoP regulon under Mg2+ and Ca2+ limited condition. This analysis revealed that PhoP governs broad cellular pathways including stress defense response, cation transportation, general metabolism, broad regulatory system, bacterial motility, and bacterial virulence. Array results provide a set of candidate genes, further biochemical pathway analysis, and signaling pathway crosstalks that need to be characterized to understand PhoP-dependent mechanisms and also suggest a putative regulatory loop between two phoP-phoQ and raxR-raxH TCSs. Implication of this analysis suggested that Xoo adopt PhoP-PhoQ system to perceive extracellular signals from certain environment such as low concentration of metal ions, and to regulate intracellular signals of other regulatory systems. Keywords: Comparative transcription profiling under limited Mg2+ Ca2+ condition

DESIGN
Three biological and dye-swap replicates, total six samples for each dataset. Three datasets contained; (i) phoP knockout mutant vs. wildtype PXO99A in low concentration (10 µM) of MgCl2 and CaCl2, (ii) phoP knockout mutant in low (10 µM) vs. high (10mM) concentration of MgCl2 and CaCl2, and (iii) PXO99A in low (10 µM) vs. high (10mM) concentration of MgCl2 and CaCl2.

PLATFORM
GPL6953 UCD_Ronald_XOarray_5K_V2.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

