TITLE
Induction of 1C Aldoketoreductases and Other Drug Dose-dependent Genes Upon Acquisition of Anthracycline Resistance

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Recent studies have suggested that elevated expression of aldoketoreductase (AKR) 1C1 or 1C2 in tumour cells is associated with increased resistance to DNA damaging agents such as cisplatin and doxorubicin.  However, it has not been shown whether selection of tumour cells for resistance to DNA-damaging anthracyclines actually results in increased expression of AKRs and increased conversion of anthracyclines to 10-fold less toxic 13-hydroxy metabolites.  It is also unclear whether the induction of aldokeoreductases is temporally correlated with the onset of anthracycline resistance and whether there is a direct relationship between the level of AKR expression or activity and the magnitude of drug resistance.  Through microarray profiling of MCF-7 breast cancer cells selected for progressive resistance to doxorubicin or epirubicin, we have identified several genes whose expression has been correlated with both the onset and magnitude of drug resistance, including a “1C” AKR.  AKR 1C overexpression was verified by quantitative PCR.  Also associated with the onset of anthracycline resistance were genes involved in drug transport (ABCB1), cell signaling and transcription (RDC1, CXCR4), cell proliferation or apoptosis (BMP7, CAV1), ROS protection (TXNRD1, MT2A), and structural or immune system proteins (IFI30, STMN1).  Consistent with the role of AKRs in anthracycline resistance, doxorubicin- and epirubicin-resistant breast tumour cells exhibited 2.2-fold and 6.1-fold higher levels of the 13-hydroxy metabolite of doxorubicin (doxorubicinol) than wildtype MCF-7 cells.  In addition, an inhibitor of AKR 1C2 (5beta-cholanic acid) almost completely restored sensitivity to doxorubicin in Abcb1-deficient doxorubicin-resistant cells, while having no effect on Abcb1-expressing epirubicin-resistant cells.  Taken together, our findings strongly suggest the involvement of multiple genes in the acquisition of anthracycline resistance in breast tumor cells---in particular redox genes such as the 1C AKRs. Keywords: Drug resistance of breast cancer cells

DESIGN
In order to identify genes whose expression strongly correlates with the acquisition or magnitude of drug resistance or are temporally related with the acquisition of resistance, we selected MCF-7 breast tumor cells for survival in increasing concentrations (doses) of doxorubicin or  epirubicin.   Panels  of  cells   exhibiting  progressive   resistance  to  either  doxorubicin (MCF-7DOX-2) or epirubicin (MCF-7EPI) were obtained.  Cells were also “selected” in the absence of drug at each step during selection to serve as co-cultured control (MCF-7CC) cells.  In this study, we have used cDNA microarray analysis of these cell lines to identify a variety of “redox” genes whose expression can be correlated with the acquisition or magnitude of drug resistance in MCF-7DOX-2 and MCF-7EPI cells, including a “1C” aldoketoreductase (AKR).

PLATFORM
GPL7052 Human 1.7K Array (H1.7K)

CITATIONS
19440163

