TITLE
Human Embryonic Stem Cell Sublines

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Human embryonic stem (ES) cell lines acquire recurrent karyotypic abnormalities that may promote growth and survival in long-term culture.  Cells with these abnormalities are often present at low levels in human ES cell cultures, requiring subcloning for isolation and analyses.  We have developed a rapid method to isolate either abnormal or normal clones from karyotypically mosaic human ES cell cultures that we call Genetic Diagnosis at Passage (G-DAP).  We have used this technique to isolate three distinct abnormal sublines from H9 human ES cells in continuous culture.  These sublines were characterized by G-banding, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), spectral karyotyping (SKY), and array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH).  One subline (H9.DT) has, as it’s only abnormality, a duplication of 12p capped by a 5q subtelomere.  A related subline (H9.TSF) has an additional copy of the derivative chromosome 12, partial trisomy of 17q, and trisomy 14.  The third subline (H9.DE) has an interstitial deletion of 18q as the sole anomaly.  Despite these karyotypic abnormalities, all three sublines retain markers of the undifferentiated state.  The subline H9.TSF demonstrated the ability to form embryoid bodies consisting of all three germ layers.  Significantly, H9.DT and H9.TSF sublines show a classic karyotype progression that mirrors that seen in both hematopoietic and solid tumors.  This progression was accompanied by an impressive increase in growth potential.  The isolation of human ES cell sublines with clonal cytogenetic abnormalities provides a valuable tool for study of factors that promote in vitro genetic changes and for analysis of mechanisms of aneuploidy related to genetic progression found in human cancers.

DESIGN
Four distinct abnormal human embryonic stem cell sublines were studied with comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and cytogenetic methodology. A rapid method called Genetic Diagnosis at Passage (G-DAP) was developed to to isolate either abnormal or normal clones from karyotypically mosaic human ES cell cultures.

PLATFORM
GPL6545 NimbleGen High Density CGH GPL7057 Nimblegen WiCell HG18 WG CGH array GPL7737 WiCell 2006-07-27 HG18 WG CGH

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

