TITLE
E2F in vivo binding specificity: comparison of consensus vs. non-consensus binding sites

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens ; Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Recent genome-scale ChIP-chip studies of transcription factors have shown that a low percentage of experimentally determined binding sites contain the consensus motif for the immunoprecipitated factor.  In most cases, differences between in vivo target sites that contain or lack a consensus motif have not been explored.  We have previously shown that most sites to which E2F family members are bound in vivo do not contain E2F consensus motifs. The main purpose of this study was to develop an understanding of how E2F binding specificity is achieved in vivo. In particular, we have addressed how E2F family members are recruited to core promoter regions that lack a consensus motif and are excluded from other regions that contain a consensus motif.  Using promoter and ENCODE arrays, we have shown that the predominant factors specifying whether E2F is recruited to an in vivo binding site are a) the site must be in a core promoter and b) the promoter region must be utilized as a promoter by the transcriptional machinery in that particular cell type.  We have tested three models for recruitment of E2F to core promoters lacking a consensus site, including a) indirect recruitment, b) looping to the core promoter mediated by an E2F bound to a distal consensus motif, and c) assisted binding of E2F to a site that weakly resembles an E2F consensus motif within the core promoter.  To test these models, we developed a new in vivo assay, termed eChIP, which allows analysis of transcription factor binding to isolated promoter fragments.  Our findings suggest that in vivo a) the presence of a consensus motif is not sufficient to recruit E2Fs, b) E2Fs can bind to isolated regions that lack a consensus motif, and c) binding can require regions other than the best match to the E2F PWM in the core promoter. Keywords: E2F, ChIP-chip, transcription factor binding, consensus motifs

DESIGN
37 ChIP-chip arrays (of these, 14 array sets are biological duplicates). 22 samples are included in this series, the rest can be found in supplementary info to the following papers: Xu 2007, Jin 2006, Komashko 2008

PLATFORM
GPL3793 Nimblegen Mouse 1.5 kb promoter array [2006-11-16_MM5_min_promoter] GPL3930 Nimblegen human 5K promoter array 2 GPL3980 UC Davis Human ENCODE array GPL4704 Nimblegen Human 5K promoter array 1

CITATIONS
18836037

