TITLE
Modulation of PrfA activity in Listeria monocytogenes upon growth in different culture media

ORGANISM
Listeria monocytogenes ; Listeria monocytogenes EGD-e

SUMMARY
PrfA activity was studied in L. monocytogenes strain EGD and in an isogenic prfA deletion mutant (EGDΔprfA) carrying multiple copies of the wild-type prfA or the mutant prfA* gene (strains EGDΔprfApPrfA and EGDΔprfApPrfA*) after growth in brain heart infusion (BHI), Luria-Bertani broth (LB) or a defined minimal medium (MM) supplemented either with one of the three PTS-carbohydrates, glucose, mannose and cellobiose, or the non-PTS carbon source glycerol. Low PrfA activity was observed in the wild-type EGD strain in BHI and LB with either of these carbon sources, while PrfA activity was high in minimal medium in presence of glycerol but significantly reduced in presence of cellobiose. The strains expressing the prfA and prfA* gene under the prfA promoters, P1 and P2, produced equally large amounts of PrfA protein and high PrfA activity was observed in strain EGDΔprfApPrfA* under all growth conditions. In contrast, high PrfA activity in strain EGDΔprfApPrfA was only observed when this strain was cultured in BHI but not in LB or MM (in presence of either carbon source). A ptsH mutant (lacking a functional HPr) was able to grow in BHI suggesting that growth of L. monocytogenes in this culture medium is supported by carbon sources whose uptake and metabolism are independent of the PTS pathway. However, this mutant was unable to grow in LB and MM regardless which of the four carbon sources was added, suggesting that uptake of the used carbohydrates and the catabolism of glycerol depend fully on the functional common PTS pathway. Furthermore, the growth rates of L. monocytogenes are strongly reduced in presence of large amounts of PrfA protein when growing MM but less in LB and only slightly in BHI. The expression profiles of the genes encoding PTS permeases were determined in the three strains under various growth conditions. The data suggest that PrfA activity correlates with the expression level and the phosphorylation state of specific PTS permeases. This SuperSeries is composed of the SubSeries listed below.

DESIGN
Refer to individual Series.

PLATFORM
GPL6554 University of Wuerzburg Listeria monocytogenes PTS 1K microarray version1 GPL7062 IHM Listeria monocytogenes whole genome 12k array

CITATIONS
19047753

