TITLE
Transcriptome profiling of control and TNFalpha treated HepG2 cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The proinflammatory cytokine, TNFalpha is critical in maintaining liver homeostasis since it is a major determiner of hepatocyte life and death. Considering this, gene transcription profiling was examined in control and TNFalpha treated HepG2 cells. Results indicated that TNFalpha could significantly alter the expression of a significant number of genes; most of them were functionally distributed among molecular functions like catalytic activity, binding, molecular transducer activity, transporter activity, translation and transcription regulator activities or enzyme regulator activity. Also, within genes up-regulated by TNFalpha, several GO terms related to lipid and fat metabolism were significantly overrepresented indicating global dysregulation of fat metabolism within the hepatocyte and those within the down-regulated dataset included genes involved in immunoglobulin receptor activity and IgE binding thereby indicating a compromise in immune defense mechanism(s) apart from those involved the DNA binding and protein binding categories.  The interacting network of “lipid metabolism, small molecule biochemistry” was derived to be significantly affected that correlated well with the top canonical pathway of “biosynthesis of steroids” and molecular and cellular function of “lipid metabolism”. All these indicate TNFalpha to be significantly altering the transcriptome profiling within HepG2 cells with genes involved in lipid and steroid metabolism being the most favoured. This study suitably addresses the genes that determine TNFalpha mediated alterations within the hepatocyte mainly the phenotypes of hepatic steatosis and fatty liver that are associated with several hepatic pathological states.

DESIGN
HepG2 cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum with 1% antibiotic-antimycotic. On attaining confluency, cells were serum starved overnight and incubated in the absence (control) and presence of TNFalpha (0.5nM, 12h). On termination of incubation, total RNA was isolated, reverse transcribed to cDNA and subjected to in vitro transcription to produce biotinylated cRNA that was hybridized to the human array chip (Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0, Affymetrix) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Images were scanned using the GeneChip 3000 7G scanner (Affymetrix) and analysed. The experiment was performed with triplicates of each set (Control and TNF alpha treated).

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
20140224

