TITLE
IMR90 4hr bystander experiment  0.5Gy alpha particle strip dish format

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Radiation affects tissue and cellular integrity at the level of DNA, protein and  metabolites of the cell and extracellular space. The effects of radiation are not limited to targeted cells and tissue and radiation induced bystander   effects are significant to exposed individuals  in accidental or therapeutic situations. These non-targeted effects of radiation have been studied extensively at the low dose range where they appear to have adverse effects on cells and surrounding environments. The requirement of cellular contact and shared fluid media has been established as critical to the bystander effect yet there is not much known about the actual signaling mechanism and its ability to transmit the damaging effect over space and time. Experimental cell types and context within the tissue are also quite important to the nature and extent of this bystander effect and must be considered when drawing parallels at the organismal level. Our approach was to use a genomic level analysis of global mRNA expression in primary lung fibroblast cells to understand the cellular triggers and mechanism of the bystander effect. Gene ontology and pathway analyses suggested that the p53 induced transcriptional response appears muted in bystanders while cytokine and cell signaling mechanisms such as those controlled by NFkB and p38 MAPK are highly active in both populations. We validated a large number of genes that are significantly changed at 4hrs after irradiation in both irradiated and bystander populations. We investigated time course gene expression profiles of cyclooxygenase2 (PTGS2), interleukin 8 (IL8) and BCL2 related protein 2 (BCL2A1), as genes that are involved in cellular signaling via the  NFkB pathway, which revealed that there is a dramatic response at 0.5hr after irradiation followed by another wave at 4hr in both populations. The induction of interleukins such as cytokine IL8 and chemokine IL6 at the transcriptional level is both early and amplified and if followed by translation and secretion of these proteins could explain the concerted response seen in bystander cells. Our results are the first to show that there is a significant and distinct global response of cellular signaling genes  in bystander cells with some genes showing a response as early as 0.5hr after irradiation which implies a fast moving intercellular signal that leads to a concerted response in the irradiated and bystander  populations. Keywords: gene expression fold change

DESIGN
There are 12 total samples, 4 corresponding biological replicates of IMR90 cells that were not irradiated (control=C), irradiated (alpha=A) and bystander (B)

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
19108712

