TITLE
Gene expression profiles regulated by Tead2 mutants, Yap, and cell density in NIH3T3 cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Regulation of organ size is important for development and tissue homeostasis. In  Drosophila, Hippo signaling controls organ size by regulating the activity of a TEAD  transcription factor, Scalloped, through modulation of its coactivator protein Yki. The  role of mammalian Tead proteins in growth regulation, however, remains unknown.  Here we examined the role of mouse Tead proteins in growth regulation. In NIH3T3  cells, cell density and Hippo signaling regulated the activity of Tead proteins by  modulating nuclear localization of a Yki homologue, Yap, and the resulting change in  Tead activity altered cell proliferation. Tead2-VP16 mimicked Yap overexpression,  including increased cell proliferation, reduced cell death, promotion of EMT, lack of cell  contact inhibition, and promotion of tumor formation. Growth promoting activities of  various Yap mutants correlated with their Tead-coactivator activities. Tead2-VP16 and  Yap regulated largely overlapping sets of genes. However, only a few of the Tead/Yapregulated  genes in NIH3T3 cells were affected in Tead1-/-;Tead2-/- or Yap-/- embryos. Most  of the previously identified Yap-regulated genes were not affected in NIH3T3 cells or  mutant mice. In embryos, levels of nuclear Yap and Tead1 varied depending on cell  types. Strong nuclear accumulation of Yap and Tead1 were seen in myocardium,  correlating with requirements of Tead1 for proliferation. However, their distribution did  not always correlate with proliferation. Taken together, mammalian Tead proteins  regulate cell proliferation and contact inhibition as a transcriptional mediator of Hippo  signaling, but the mechanisms by which Tead/Yap regulate cell proliferation differ  depending on cell types, and Tead, Yap and Hippo signaling may play multiple roles in  mouse embryos. We used microarrays to know the gene expression profiles regurated by Tead2-VP16, Tead2-EnR, Yap, and cell density in NIH3T3 cells. Keywords: Cell density, genetic modification

DESIGN
Tead2-VP16-, Tead2-EnR-, Yap- and control vector-expressing cells were cultured at low or high density for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19004856

