TITLE
Analyses of the SAGE expression of Human Embryonic Stem Cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
A plethora of research has focused on the human embryonic stem cells (hESC) ever since they were first reported mainly due to their distinct features of self renewal and pluripotency. Probing of the hESC transcriptome using global expression profiling tools such as DNA microarray, Serial Analysis of Gene Expression (SAGE), Massively Parallel Signature Sequencing (MPSS) and Expressed Sequence Tag (EST) analysis have contributed significantly in our current understanding of hESCs. In fact, a large number of markers to assess the pluripotent and differentiation status of hESCs have been presented by such studies. However, till date clarity is lacking in identifying a robust set of markers to assess the true state of the hESCs. In this paper, we report the generation of long SAGE libraries for partially differentiated and differentiated HES3 along with a deeper profiling of our previously reported HES3 undifferentiated library. Clustering analysis of these libraries in concert with long and short SAGE libraries available in public databases using Hierarchical Cluster Analysis (HCA) as well as a poison-based approach helped in identification of expression patterns distinct from those reported for the well established pluriptency/differentiation markers. Almost all the previous studies reporting a robust set of markers have focused on a gene by gene comparison in listing out the upregulated and downregulated genes rather than look at the expression patterns in establishing a list of markers. In this analysis, however, we report a new set of markers as well as add confidence to some previously reported markers based on their novel expression patterns as identified by SAGE analysis and also confirm it by real-time PCR analysis. For the real-time PCR confirmation, instead of taking two extreme data sets such as undifferentiated and a late stage embryoid body, we profiled a time series of embryoid body stages so that we could identify those genes which show a dramatic increase or decrease upon differentiation and hence would serve as more reliable markers.

DESIGN
The hESC lines HES3 from ES Cell International, Singapore ( http://www.escellinternational.com ) were cultured on mouse embryonic fibroblast feeders (MEFs) as described previously.  Selection of cells for library construction was done by micro-dissection following our established protocols. Spontaneous differentiation was induced by prolonged culture without changing the feeder layer.  Briefly the HES3 cell line was grown to 18 passages (P18) on MEFs, after which no sub-culturing was performed. The medium was changed daily for 25 days and the differentiated cell population was harvested at the end of the culture period by micro-dissection. Cell differentiation was confirmed by Immuno-cytochemistry for markers to the three germ layers, as well as RT-PCR for the differentiation markers. For construction of the partially differentiated library, colonies which had started differentiation, as suggested by the morphological changes towards the centre and periphery of the colonies were used. Entire HES3 colonies (24P) which had started differentiation were harvested by micro-dissection and used for library construction. MmeI was used as tagging enzyme and libraries were constructed using the LS-SAGE kit from Invitrogen ( http://www.invitrogen.com ). Cloning of concatemerized ditags and sequencing of tags were done as outlined earlier. The 10 bp SAGE tags were extracted using Microsoft Excel for direct comparisons between libraries.

PLATFORM
GPL1485 SAGE:17:NlaIII:Homo sapiens

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

