TITLE
Cardiac samples from OTT1 null/null and OTT1 null/wt embryonic mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The infant leukemia-associated gene, Ott1(Rbm15), has broad regulatory effects within the murine hematopoiesis. However, germline Ott1 deletion  results in fetal demise prior to E10.5, indicating additional developmental requirements for Ott1. The spen gene family, to which Ott1 belongs, has a transcriptional activation/repression domain and RNA recognition motifs, and in Drosophila has a significant role in the development of the head and thorax. Early Ott1-deficient embryos show growth retardation and incomplete closure of the notochord. Further analysis demonstrated placental defects in the spongiotrophoblast and syncytiotrophoblast layers, resulting in an arrest of vascular branching morphogenesis. Rescue of the placental defect using a conditional allele with a trophoblast-sparing cre transgene allowed embryos to form a normal placenta and survive gestation. This result shows that the process of vascular branching morphogenesis in Ott1-deficient animals is regulated by the trophoblast compartment rather than the fetal vasculature. Mice surviving to term manifested hyposplenia and abnormal cardiac development. Analysis of global gene expression of Ott1-deficient embryonic hearts shows enrichment of hypoxia-related genes and significant alteration of several candidate genes critical for cardiac development. Thus, Ott1-dependent pathways in addition to being implicated in leukemogenesis, may also be important in the pathogenesis of placental insufficiency and cardiac malformations.

DESIGN
We generated in triplicate mice containing the Ott1flox and Ott1null alleles. Tg-Sox2-cre animals were obtained from Jackson labs (Bar Harbor, ME). Genotyping was performed by PCR analysis of murine or embryonic tissue [Raffel, 2007 #218]. Timed matings were determined by presence of a vaginal plug at E0.5. RNA was extracted from 3 hearts each from  either Ott1null/nullSox2-cre or Ott1null/wtSox2-cre E18.5 embryos using the RNeasy Micro kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and treated with RNAse-free DNAse (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). 50 ng of purified total RNA was linearly amplified using the Ovation RNA amplification system V2 (Nugen, San Carlos, CA) and biotinylated with the FL-Ovation Biotin Module V2 (Nugen, San Carlos, CA) per the supplied protocol. cDNA was then hybridized to Affymetrix Mouse expression array 430A2.0 chips by the Dana Farber Microarray Core Facility (Boston, MA).  The raw gene expression values were preprocessed with robust multi-array analysis (RMA) algorithm using BioConductor software.

PLATFORM
GPL8321 [Mouse430A_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430A 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
18981216

