TITLE
Molecular profiling of the of conjunctival epithelial side population cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Side population (SP) cells isolated from limbal and conjunctival epithelia derive from cells that are slow cycling in vivo, a known feature of tissue stem cells. The purpose of this study was to define the molecular signature of the conjunctival side population cells by global differential gene expression to identify markers and signaling pathways associated with this cell phenotype. Four overnight cultures of freshly isolated human conjunctival epithelial cells stained with Hoechst 3342 were cytometrically sorted into SP and non-SP cohorts. RNA was isolated and processed for microarray analysis using a commercial oligonucleotide array representing more than 55,000 transcripts derived from about 30,000 different genes.  Selected microarray results were validated at the gene and protein levels by quantitative PCR, and immunological methods. Data mining methods were used to identify cellular processes relevant for stem cell function. Comparative analysis of transcripts expression based on expression levels and present/absent software calls across 4 replicate experiments identified 16993 expressed conjunctival epithelial transcripts including 10,266 unique known genes. Of those genes, 1254 and 363 were over expressed ( > 2-fold ) or under expressed ( < 0.5-fold), respectively, in the SP.  The overexpressed set included genes coding for non-epithelial genes (e.g.,  CD62E/E-selectin and CD93), genes that have been associated with stem cell function in other cellular systems, including several homeodomain genes and genes whose over- or under-expression may underpin the stem cell slow cycling phenotype  ( e.g., dual specificity phosphatases and cyclin kinases).

DESIGN
Whole human conjunctivae from unidentifiable cadaver donors, aged 55 to 65, were obtained from the National Disease Research Interchange (NDRI, Philadelphia, PA) within 48 hours of collection. No donor details apart from age, sex, and cause of death were released.  The use of human tissue in the study was in accordance with the provisions of the Declaration of Helsinki and sanctioned by the Institutional Review Board.  Fresh rabbit tissue was obtained from local abattoirs within one hour of sacrifice. Unless stated otherwise all reagents were procured from Sigma (St. Louis, Mo). Eight microarray experiments using side population (Hoechst 33342-transporting cells; SP) or non side population (Hoechst 33342-stained cells; nSP) cells from four cadavers.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19324848

