TITLE
Expression of mRNAs Regulating Synaptic Function and Neuroplasticity in Incipient AD

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In Alzheimer’s disease (AD), early deficits in learning and memory are a consequence of synaptic modification which are likely induced by toxic beta-amyloid oligomers (oAβ).  To identify molecular targets downstream of oAβ binding  we prepared synaptoneurosomes from frontal cortex of control and IAD patients, and isolated mRNAs for comparison of gene expression.  This approach elevated synaptic mRNAs above the threshold necessary for expression changes to be discriminated and also reduced other cellular mRNAs.  In patients with minimal cognitive impairment (MCI) termed incipient AD (IAD) global measures of cognition declined with increasing levels of dimeric Aβ (dAβ).  These patients also showed increased expression of neuroplasticity related genes, many encoding 3' UTR  consensus sequences that regulate local translation in the synapse.  One such gene, GluR2, displayed elevated mRNA and protein expression in IAD.  Other neurotransmitter-related genes were also upregulated.  Overexpressed genes may induce compensatory as well as negative effects on cognition and provide targets for intervention to moderate the response to dAβ.

DESIGN
Patient information CNS tissues were obtained from the USC Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (ADRC) Neuropathology Core, NIA AG05142. Clinical information, including neurological examination, neuropsychological testing such as cognitive assessment, family history, and medications were provided by the USC ADRC Clinical Core.  The groups did not differ significantly in age or years of education.  Medication histories indicated one IAD patient had used a selective serotonin uptake inhibitor.  Post-mortem interval (PMI) ranged from 2 to 9 hours (mean 5.1 hrs.). The study included 8 normal controls and 6 patients with Incipient Alzheimer's Disease. To augment studies  comparing homogenates of  control to AD brains, we used synaptoneurosome preparations  to enrich for synaptic mRNAs.  Synaptoneurosomes were prepared from the prefrontal cortices of control and IAD patients by a simple, rapid, but gentle method using sequential mesh screens.

PLATFORM
GPL96 [HG-U133A] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A Array

CITATIONS
19295912

