TITLE
Cooperative actions of p53 and Pten in normal and neoplastic progenitor cell renewal and differentiation

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Glioblastoma (GBM) is a highly lethal brain tumor presenting as one of two subtypes with distinct clinical histories and molecular profiles. The primary GBM subtype presents acutely as high-grade disease that typically harbors EGFR, PTEN and Ink4a/Arf mutations, and the secondary GBM subtype evolves from the slow progression of low-grade disease that classically possesses PDGF and p53 events1.  Here, we show that concomitant CNS-specific deletion of p53 and Pten in the mouse CNS generates a penetrant acute-onset high-grade malignant glioma phenotype with striking clinical, pathological and molecular resemblance to primary GBM in humans.  This genetic observation prompted p53 and PTEN mutational analysis in human primary GBM, demonstrating unexpectedly frequent inactivating mutations of p53 as well the expected PTEN mutations.  Integrated transcriptomic profling, in silico promoter analysis and functional studies of murine neural stem cells (NSCs) established that dual, but not singular, inactivation of p53 and Pten promotes an undifferentiated state with high renewal potential and drives elevated c-Myc levels and its associated signature.  Functional studies validated increased c-Myc activity as a potent contributor to the impaired differentiation and enhanced renewal of p53-Pten null NSCs as well as tumor neurospheres (TNSs) derived from this model.  c-Myc also serves to maintain robust tumorigenic potential of p53-Pten null TNSs. These murine modeling studies, together with confirmatory transcriptomic/promoter studies in human primary GBM, validate a pathogenetic role of a common tumor suppressor mutation profile in human primary GBM and establish c-Myc as a key target for cooperative actions of p53 and Pten in the regulation of normal and malignant stem/progenitor cell differentiation, self-renewal and tumorigenic potential. We used microarrays to detail the gene expression difference of the p53-null and p53/Pten-doubly null neural stem cell after differentiation . Keywords: cell type comparison

DESIGN
transcriptome comparisons of 2 independent p53-null with 3 p53/Pten double-null murine NSCs at 1 day post exposure to the differentiation inducer.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
18948956

