TITLE
Gene expression during germination in the Chytridiomycete Blastocladiella emersonii

ORGANISM
Blastocladiella emersonii

SUMMARY
To investigate global changes in gene expression during B. emersonii germination process, we constructed cDNA microarrays containing 3,563 putative unique genes. Analyses were carried out during germination induced under various environmental conditions. Microarray data revealed that 26% of them are differentially expressed during germination in nutrient medium, in at least one of the time points investigated. Over 500 genes are up regulated during the time course of germination under these conditions, most of them being related to cell growth, including genes involved in protein biosynthesis, DNA transcription, energetic metabolism, carbohydrate and oligopeptide transport, and cell cycle control. On the other hand, several transcripts stored in the zoospores are down regulated during germination in nutrient medium, such as genes involved in signal transduction, amino acid transport and chromosome organization. We also compared germination induced in the presence of nutrients with that triggered either by adenine or potassium ions in inorganic salt solution. Several genes involved in cell growth that are induced during germination in nutrient medium do not show increased expression when B. emersonii zoospores germinate in inorganic solution, indicating that nutrients exert a positive regulatory effect on the transcription of these genes.

DESIGN
Differentially expressed genes during germination were investigated in a time-course experiment, using RNA samples isolated from cells collected 30, 60 and 90 min after inoculation of zoospores in nutrient medium DM3. The reference sample was zoospore RNA, which was considered the time zero of germination. We also compared germination in nutrient medium with germination induced in inorganic salt solution, triggered either by adenine or potassium ions. In these experiments we considered germination in nutrient medium as the reference sample. There are at least 3 biological replicates (independent harvest) and 2 technical replicates for each array (L-left and R-right).

PLATFORM
GPL7334 USP Blastocladiella emersonii 4.6 K Blasto3773 v3

CITATIONS
19098129

