TITLE
mRNA profile in purified human peripheral blood eosinophil treated with retinoic acids

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Objectives: Eosinophils cultured with all-trans RA (ATRA) and 9-cis RA showed dramatically induced cell survival, and the efficacy of RAs (10-6 M) was similar to that of IL-5 (1 ng/ml), the most critical cytokine for eosinophil activation.  Using a gene microarray, we studied mRNA profile regulated by RAs. Methods: Peripheral venous blood was obtained from subjects with mild eosinophilia.  Eosinophils were isolated by sedimentation with 6% dextran followed by centrifugation on 1.088 Percoll (Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden) density gradients.  The cells were further purified by negative selection using anti-CD16 immunomagnetic beads and a MACS system (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany).  Purified eosinophils were resuspended in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco, Grand Island, NY) with 10% FCS, and incubated with vehicle, 10-6 M of 9-cis RA, or ATRA in 1% human serum albumin-coated plates, each 4 × 106 cells, for 4 h.  Then cells were lysed, and total RNA was isolated using Isogen (Nippon Gene, Tokyo, Japan) as per the manufacturer’s instructions.  RNA was repurified with phenol-chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation.  For each cell culture condition, the total RNA from three donors was pooled, enabling us to acquire adequate amounts of RNA for microarray analysis. Results: There was little variation between the samples treated by 9-cisRA and ATRA.  The comparison between vehicle control and 9-cisRA, or vehicle control and ATRA, identified an increase (greater than twofold change over control) in 19 and 11 transcripts, respectively.   The number of decreased transcripts (less than 0.5-fold) resulting fromby 9-cisRA or ATRA exposure wasere 19 and 8 transcripts, respectively.  In these transcripts, the expression changes relative to vehicle control were smaller in withthe ATRA compared with 9-cis RA, suggesting that 9-cis RA induced gene transcription more effectively rather than ATRA.  Of note, among the ten genes with the biggestmost decrease relative tofrom vehicle control, we found an apoptosis- related gene, caspase-3. Conclusions: We screened several genes involved in RA-induced prolonged eosinophil survival.

DESIGN
Purified peripheral blood eosinophils were incubated with vehicle, 10-6 M of 9-cis RA, or ATRA in 1% human serum albumin-coated plates, each 4 × 106 cells, for 4 h.  Then cells were lysed, and total RNA was isolated.  RNA was repurified with phenol-chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation.  For each cell culture condition, the total RNA from three donors was pooled, enabling us to acquire adequate amounts of RNA for microarray analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL5460 Genomessage Homo sapiens 0.7k

CITATIONS
19017957

