TITLE
miRNA profiles of diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) derived cell lines

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
miRNA profiling of human Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) cell lines derived from the two main subtypes of this disease: Activated B Cell like (ABC-DLBCL) and Germinal Center B cell like  (GCB-DLBCL), analyzing the 711 human miRNAs present in miRBase V10.0. Five ABC-like DLBCL cell lines (RIVA, Oci-Ly3, Oci-Ly10, HBL1 and U2932) and three GCB-like DLBCL cell lines (Oci-Ly7, Oci-Ly19 and SUDHL-6) were cultured in IMDM (Cellgro) with 20% human plasma, 1% penicillin/streptomycin/L-glutamine (Cellgro,) and 0,2% beta mercaptoethanol (Invitrogen). Total RNA was extracted from cell pellets using the mirVana™ miRNA Isolation Kit (Ambion), and sent to LC Sciences facility for microarray hybridization using microfluidics technology. FirstChoice® Human Skeletal Muscle Total RNA (Ambion) was used as common reference for all hybridizations. Background substracted and normalized data from each channel was used to calculate log ratios sample/reference. Keywords: miRNA profiling

DESIGN
Dual channel experiments using FirstChoice® Human Skeletal Muscle Total RNA (Ambion) as common reference for all hybridizations. Reference was labeled with Cy5 and the cell line extracted RNA with Cy3. Biological replicates: 5 ABC-DLBCL cell lines and 3 GCB-DLBCL cell lines. Microarray hybridization was performed at LC Sciences, using slides containing in situ synthesized oligonucleotides to detect the 711 miRNAs present in miRBase V10.0. Probes hsa-miR-337 and hsa-miR-542-5p were excluded due to systematic dye bias, according to the manufacturer intructions. Background substracted and normalized detectable data was used to calculate log ratios sample/reference. Background is determined using a regression-based background mapping method.  The regression is performed on 5% to 25% of the lowest intensity data points excluding blank spots.  Raw data matrix is then subtracted by the background matrix. Normalization was carried out using a LOWESS (Locally-weighted Regression) method on the background-subtracted data.   A transcript to be listed as detectable must meets at least two conditions: signal intensity higher than 3×(background standard deviation) and spot CV < 0.5.  CV is calculated by (standard deviation)/(signal intensity).  When repeating probes are present on an array, a transcript is listed as detectable only if the signals from at least 50% of the repeating probes are above detection level.

PLATFORM
GPL7373 LC Sciences_miRNA_Human_v10(1).0

CITATIONS
19047678

