TITLE
Transcriptomic differences between E. coli B REL606 and K-12 MG1655

ORGANISM
Escherichia coli

SUMMARY
Transcriptome profiles were analyzed using the samples taken at the exponential and stationary phases during the cultivation of REL606 and MG1655 in LB medium. At the exponential growth phase, most highly expressed genes of B were those for replication, translation, or nucleotide transport and metabolism, while many of the K-12 genes were involved in cell motility, transcription, carbohydrate transport, or energy production. At the stationary phase, many of the genes highly expressed in B were for transport and metabolism of various amino acids and carbohydrates, whereas those in K-12 had functions related to cell motility, ribosomal subunit protein production, or energy generation. Many genes in REL606 and MG1655 showed highly distinct expression levels irrespective of growth conditions. Highly expressed genes in REL606 included those encoding enzymes for biosynthesis of L-arginine (argAGDECBHI) and branched-chain amino acid (ilvGMEDA), and those encoding a subunit of the L-arginine transporter (artJ), cytochrome b562 (cybC), subunits of the histidine ABC transporter (hisPJ), cytotoxins (hokED), outer membrane porin (ompF), L-arginine decarboxylase (speA), and cell division inhibitor (sulA). Highly expressed genes in MG1655 included those for chemotaxis (cheZYRWA, tap, trg, tsr), Lon protease (lon), C4-dicarboxylate-sensing histidine kinase (dcuS), chaperones (clpB, dnaK, groES, htpG, ibpA), the major subunit of type 1 fimbriae (fimA), a regulator of flagellar biosynthesis (flhC), glycerol-3-phosphate-dehydrogenase (glpABCD), glycerophosphoryl diester phosphodiesterase (glpQ), glycerol-3-phosphate transporter (glpT), hydrogenase 2 (hybCBO), outer membrane porins (nmpC, ompA, ompC), and galactitol transport and metabolism (gatYZC).

DESIGN
All microarray experiments were performed in duplicate with dye-swapping. The probes were spotted in duplicate onto the microarray. Thus, the log2 of the intensity ratio with the two dyes for each spot was calculated from up to four values from the duplicated spot on the microarray and the dye-swap experiment.

PLATFORM
GPL7395 MGAC_Ecoli_v1.0

CITATIONS
22632713

