TITLE
Widespread transcriptional changes preempt the critical pelagic-benthic transition in the vetigastropod Haliotis asinina

ORGANISM
Haliotis asinina

SUMMARY
Larval settlement and metamorphosis is a vital transition period for marine invertebrates and can have far-reaching effects on the ecology and evolution of a species. To explore the molecular mechanisms of this critical process in a non-model organism, the tropical abalone Haliotis asinina, we employed cDNA microarray methods. By comparing gene expression profiles through mid to late larval development and metamorphosis, we identified 144 genes as likely candidates for a role in competence and/or metamorphosis. Gene characterization showed that ~60% of these were significantly similar to previously described genes from other taxa, while ~40% had no significant similarities to any known genes. A high 49.3% of genes were gastropod- or abalone-specific, but none appear to be Lophotrochozoan-specific, despite the fact that metamorphosis is thought to have had a separate origin in this group. Based on temporal expression profiles, the differentially expressed larval and postlarval genes can be clustered into 5 categories that reveal there are strikingly different transcriptional patterns occurring during this phase of development. Some classes of gene activation are contingent upon exogenous cues and correlate with the initiation of settlement and metamorphosis. Importantly, there is also extensive gene activity associated with the endogenous attainment of competence, which occurs prior to, and independent of, the exogenous induction of settlement. Our results show that as the haliotid veliger larva matures, it requires the coordinated regulation of temporally different batteries of genes involved in a wide range of physiological and developmental processes associated with colonisation of the benthos. Although the signalling pathways operating at metamorphosis may be conserved across the animal kingdom, it appears they are regulating the expression of novel genes specific to abalone, gastropods and molluscs during H. asinina metamorphosis. Keywords: timecourse; metamorphosis; marine ecology

DESIGN
Each microarray slide contained a different combination of 2 of the 9 developmental stages used in the experiment (66 hpf, 78 hpf, 90 hpf, 108 hpf, 120 hpf, 144 hpf, 12 hpi, 24 hpi, 48 hpi). Each developmental stage was subjected to 4 hybridisations – amounting to 4 technical replicates per stage - in a loop design (Churchill 2002; Oleksiak et al. 2002). This design led to raw data consisting of 72 measurements - 9 stages with 8 replicates (including 2 replicates per chip) - for each of 5541 spots.

PLATFORM
GPL7421 QIMR Haliotis asinina custom 5.5k cDNA array

CITATIONS
19207244

