TITLE
Human primary and secondary glioblastoma vs. non-neoplastic adult brain tissue

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small (21-25 nucleotide in length) non-coding RNA molecules that negatively regulate protein expression. They are linked to cancer development and maintenance. In this work, studying gene expression profiles of 340 mammalian miRNAs with DNA microarrays, we selected 10 miRNAs gene features able to distinguish primary from secondary glioblastoma type; furthermore we verified that miR-21 and miR-155 up-regulatation seems to characterize the glioblastoma tumour state since it was found up-regulated in all samples analyzed compared to adult brain noneoplastic tissue. Since miR-21 function in glioblastoma cells was addressed previously we concentrated our efforts on miR-155 function. We found that miR-155 levels were markedly elevated both in primary and secondary glioblastomas tumours, in glioblastoma cell cultures and in 4 glioblastoma cell lines (U87, A172, LN229, and LN308) compared with adult brain tissue, CHP212-neuroblastoma cell lines and DAOY-1-medulloblastoma cell line.  Since one of the miR-155 target was gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) A receptor (GABRA1) we verified if there was a relation between miR-155 up-regulation and GABRA1 expression. We  demonstrated that, in cultured glioblastoma cells, knockdown of miR-155, which lower miR-155 expression to normal level, restore the normal expression of the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) A receptor (GABRA1), making glioblastoma cells responsive to GABA cell cycle inhibiting signals. Our data suggest that aberrantly over-expressed miR-155 contribute to the malignant phenotype of the glioblastoma cells, promoting their unlimited growth. Keywords: miRNA expression profile

DESIGN
We studied the expression profiles of 340 miRNAs in 97 glioblastoma tissues, of which 66 were primary glioblastomas and 27 were secondary glioblastomas. We have 66 replicates of primary glioblastoma and 27 replicates of secondary glioblastoma, each hybridized with the respective adult non-neoplastic brain tissue as a control.

PLATFORM
GPL7389 DiSteBa_Homo sapiens_Glioblastoma miRNA 340_v1.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

