TITLE
Microarray analysis of phosphate regulation in Synechococcus sp. WH8102

ORGANISM
Synechococcus sp. WH 8102

SUMMARY
Primary productivity of open ocean environments, such as those inhabited by marine picocyanobacteria Synechococcus sp.WH8102, are often limited by low inorganic phosphate (P). To observe how this organism copes with P starvation, we constructed a full genome microarray and examined differences in gene expression under P-limited and P-replete growth conditions. To determine the temporal nature of the responses, comparisons were made for cells newly entered into P-stress (at a time point corresponding to the induction of extracellular alkaline phosphatase activity) and a later time point (late log phase). In almost all instances the P starvation response was transitory, with 36 genes showing significant upregulation ( > log2 fold) while 23 genes were highly downregulated at the early time point; however, these changes in expression were maintained for only five of the upregulated genes. Knockout mutants were constructed for genes SYNW0947 or SYNW0948, comprising a two component regulator hypothesized to play a key role in regulating the response to P-limitation. A high degree of overlap in the sets of genes affected by P-limited conditions and in the knockout mutants supports this hypothesis; however there is some indication that other regulators may play a role in this response in Synechococcus sp. WH8102. Consistent with what has been observed in many other cyanobacteria, the Pho regulon of this strain is comprised largely of genes for alkaline phosphatases, P transport or P metabolism. Interestingly, however, the exact composition and arrangement of the Pho regulon appears highly variable in marine cyanobacteria.

DESIGN
In this series four conditions have been analyzed.  These are low phosphate stress during early log phase, low phosphate stress during late log phase, SYNW0947 mutation, and SYNW0948 mutation.  There are six slides per condition, each with two biological replicates.  There are three technical replicates for each biological replicate including one flip-dye comparison.  The exception is the low phosphate stress during late log phase experiment which has a total of five slides, two biological replicates with three and two technical replicates, respectively, and one flip-dye comparison for each biological replicate.  Each slide contains six replicate spots per gene.

PLATFORM
GPL7448 JCVI Synechococcus sp. WH 8102 19K v1.0 GPL7449 JCVI Synechococcus sp. WH 8102 19K v2.0

CITATIONS
19340084

