TITLE
Macrophages stimulated with LPS and Poly (I:C)

ORGANISM
Oncorhynchus mykiss

SUMMARY
The aim of the current study was to investigate the response of in vitro differentiated trout macrophages, a primary cell culture system widely used in fish immunology research, to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and to the analog viral ds(RNA) Poly I:C. To that end we have used a salmonid-specific microarray platform enriched with immune-related genes. The results clearly suggest that the molecular mechanisms involved in the response of macrophages to LPS and Poly (I:C) are specific in some signaling pathways related to cell communication, signal transduction and kinase cascades. Nevertheless, macrophages stimulated with bacterial or viral PAMPs also activate common transcription factors.

DESIGN
Trout macrophages were isolated using the protocol previously described Head kidneys were dissected, placed in sterile 100 µm nylon mesh cell-strainers and homogenized in the presence of DMEM (PAA Laboratories) containing high glucose, 10% heat inactivated FCS (PAA Laboratories) and Primocin antibiotic (100 µg/ml, Invivogen). The homogenates were plated on 60 mm poly-D-lysine (Sigma) treated cell culture Petri plates, 3 ml per plate. The cultures were kept in an incubator at 16 º C and 5% CO2. Non-adhering cells were removed after 24 hours and new medium was added, then adherent cells were incubated for another 4 days. After 5 total days of culture, medium was removed and test cells were stimulated adding fresh medium containing 10 µg/ml of  LPS from E. coli (serotype 026:B6, Sigma) or 10 µg/ml of Poly (I:C) (Invivogen), whereas medium free of stimulant was added in control plates. All culture plates were incubated for 12h. Six independent experiments (six different fish) were performed for each condition. Total RNA was extracted from the cultures using 1 ml of Tri Reagent (Sigma), following the manufacturer’s instructions and quantity and integrity was analyzed by Experion RNA StdSens Analysis Kit (Bio-Rad). The design of the microarray posses 1818 genes printed in six replicates each, including random clones from common and subtracted cDNA libraries which were compared with known vertebrate proteins using blastx. The platform was enriched in immune-related genes.

PLATFORM
GPL6154 UKU_trout_1.8K_v1

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

