TITLE
Comparative analysis of the human and mouse placental transcriptome and proteome

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens ; Mus musculus

SUMMARY
An important question for the use of the mouse as a model for studying human disease is the degree of functional conservation of genetic control pathways from human to mouse. The human and mouse placenta show structural similarities but there have been no systematic attempt to assess their molecular similarities or differences. We built a comprehensive database of protein and microarray data for the highly vascular exchange region micro-dissected from the human and mouse placenta near-term. Abnormalities in this region are associated with two of the most common and serious complications of human pregnancy, maternal preeclampsia (PE) and fetal intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), each disorder affecting ~5% of all pregnancies. Over 7,000 orthologs were detected with 70% co-expressed and over 80% of genes known to cause placental phenotypes in mouse were co-expressed. These genes form a tight protein-protein interaction network with novel candidate genes likely to be important in placental structure and/or function. The entire data is available as a web-accessible database to guide the informed development of mouse models to study human disease. This experiment is now fully represented in the NCBI Peptidome database with accession PSE115.

DESIGN
Microdissection of human villous trees and mouse placental labyrinth. Tissues were split for microarray and protein analysis. For protein analysis samples were first fractionated by differential sucrose gradients into mitochrondria, cytosol, microsomes and nuclei. Mitochrondira and neuclei were each extracted by two different methods for soluble and insoluble material. Each subcellular fraction for each tissue was analysed in quintuplet by 9 step 2 dimensional LC/MSMS. This generated a total of 270 mzXML files for each tissue.

PLATFORM
GPL7497 Virtual Platform for Peptidome Submissions

CITATIONS
19536202

