TITLE
DNA methylation in wild-type bolting Arabidopsis thaliana plants

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
The purpose of the McrBC methylation microarray assay is to determine which regions of a genome are methylated versus those that are unmethylated in a single Arabidopsis thanliana genotype. McrBC is a methylation-sensitive enzyme that restricts DNA only at purine-Cmethyl half sites when separated between 50bp and 3kb. A designated amount of DNA from a particular genotype is sheared to a size range of 1kb-10kb using nebulization. We restrict half of the nebulized DNA with McrBC, and the methylated fraction is then removed from the unmethylated fraction through gel purification of DNA fragments greater than 1kb.* The remaining nebulized DNA is subjected to the same gel purification scheme, but with no McrBC treatment. In a single hybridization, the untreated sample is labeled with Cy5 and the McrBC-treated sample with Cy3. Thus, after labeling and microarray hybridization, the ratio of normalized Cy5 to normalized Cy3 represents the relative methylation at the sequence represented by the spot on the microarray. Dye swap analysis is carried out to take account of experimental variation by repeating the hybridization with identical samples labeled with Cy3 and Cy5, respectively. The two samples in this series are complementary hybridizations in a dye-swap analysis. This is the normalized result of the paired dye swap samples VC121 and VC127. The ANOVA model of Kerr, Martin and Churchill (2000) was used to analyze the data from the dye-swap experiments, with terms included to account for gene, dye-by-gene, treatment-by-gene, and random error terms. These samples were not subjected to hypothesis testing. Therefore, P-values are reported as -1 and no features are flagged as significantly methylated. Keywords: other

PLATFORM
GPL785 Arabidopsis thaliana (ecotype Columbia) chromosome 4 knob genomic tiling array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

