TITLE
Expression profiling of Candida albicans and Candida dubliniensis in reconstituted human oral epithelium 30 min p.i.

ORGANISM
Candida albicans ; Candida dubliniensis

SUMMARY
Candida albicans and Candida dubliniensis are closely related species displaying differences in virulence and genome content, therefore providing potential opportunities to identify novel C. albicans virulence genes. C. albicans gene arrays were used for comparative analysis of global gene expression in the two species in reconstituted human oral epithelium (RHE). C. albicans (SC5314) showed upregulation of hypha-specific and virulence genes within 30 min postinoculation, coinciding with rapid induction of filamentation and increased RHE damage. C. dubliniensis (CD36) showed no detectable upregulation of hypha-specific genes, grew as yeast, and caused limited RHE damage. Several genes absent or highly divergent in C. dubliniensis were upregulated in C. albicans. One such gene, SFL2 (orf19.3969), encoding a putative heat shock factor, was deleted in C. albicans. ΔΔsfl2 cells failed to filament under a range of hypha-inducing conditions and exhibited greatly reduced RHE damage, reversed by reintroduction of SFL2 into the ΔΔsfl2 strain. Moreover, SFL2 overexpression in C. albicans triggered hyphal morphogenesis. Although SFL2 deletion had no apparent effect on host survival in the murine model of systemic infection, ΔΔsfl2 strain-infected kidney tissues contained only yeast cells. These results suggest a role for SFL2 in morphogenesis and an indirect role in C. albicans pathogenesis in epithelial tissues.

DESIGN
Global gene expression in Candida albicans SC5314 or Candida dubliniensis CD36 on reconstituted human oral epithelium (RHE) 30 min postinoculation. Gene expression on RHE was compared to gene expression in cells used as inoculum (0 min). Performed in three biological replicates with dye swaps across the biological replicates. Gene expression of Candida cells on RHE was normalized to gene expression in reference control (0 min); log2 ratios were calculated by dividing spot intensity of experimental by that of the reference control.

PLATFORM
GPL6475 Candida albicans expression array

CITATIONS
20023067

