TITLE
Acute effects of different dietary fatty acids on the gene expression profiles of PBMCs of healthy young men

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Acute effects of different dietary fatty acids on the gene expression profiles of peripheral blood mononuclear cells in healthy young men. A randomized cross-over study. Gene expression profiles of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) have been used to reflect pathological and physiological states of humans. We theorized that these cells could also be used to show fatty acid specific gene expression profiles. Since most individuals are in a postprandial state for the main part of the day, knowledge about acute effects of diet is highly valuable. In a cross over study, 21 healthy male volunteers were given shakes containing mainly polyunsaturated or saturated fatty acids. Before and 6 hours after intake of the shakes blood was taken and PBMCs were isolated to use for whole genome gene expression profiling, using Affymetrix NuGO_Hs1a52018 arrays. PUFA intake showed an decrease in LXR signaling and an increase in cellular stress response, while SFA intake showed an increase in LXR signaling.We conclude that PBMCs can reveal a fatty acid specific gene expression profile and in this study show an adverse effect on cellular stress responses of immune cells upon high PUFA intake. We hypothesize that these cells can therefore be used as biomarkers to reflect the capacity of cells to response to cellular stressors, such as fatty acids. Keywords: Acute fatty acid shake cross-over intervention study

DESIGN
In a cross-over design, fasting venous blood samples were collected at baseline and every 2 hours after intake of shakes containing SFA, MUFA or PUFA, up to eight hours after intake. Bood was collected for PBMC isolation, using BD Vacutainer Cell Preparation Tubes with sodium citrate (BD, Breda, The Netherlands). Immediately after blood collection PBMCs were isolated according to the manufacturer’s manual.  PBMC RNA was isolated from all PBMC samples using Qiagen RNeasy Micro kit (Qiagen, Venlo, the Netherlands). Total RNA from PBMCs from 21 subjects, after intake of the SFA shake and after intake of the PUFA shake, was labeled using a one-cycle cDNA labeling kit (MessageAmpTM II-Biotin Enhanced Kit, Ambion, Inc.) and hybridized to Affymetrix NuGO_Hs1a52018 arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL7144 NuGO array (human) NuGO_Hs1a520180 [CDF: Hs_ENTREZG_10]

CITATIONS
19923369

