TITLE
Transcriptional response in skin of mouse 24 hours after intradermal infection with Trypanosoma cruzi

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
To investigate the early host response triggered by three different strains of Trypanosoma cruzi at a local infection site, changes in host gene expression were monitored in a murine intradermal infection model using Affymetrix oligonucleotide arrays. Robust induction of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) was observed in excised skin 24 hours post-infection where the level of ISG induction was parasite strain-dependent with the least virulent strain triggering a muted IFN response. Infection of mice immunodepleted of IFNγ-producing cells or infection of IFNγ-deficient mice had minimal impact on the IFN response generated in T. cruzi infected mice. In contrast, infection of mice lacking the type I IFN receptor demonstrated that type I IFNs are largely responsible for the IFN response generated at the site of infection. These data highlight type I IFNs as important components of the innate immune response to T. cruzi the site of inoculation and their role in shaping the early transcriptional response to this pathogen. We used microarrays to detail the local host transcriptional response to intradermal T. cruzi infection in WT mice and mice depleted of NK cells, or deficient in IFN-gamma or type I IFN responses. Additionally we compared the local host-transcriptional response generated to infection with 3 different strains of Trypanosoma cruzi (Y, Brazil, and G). Keywords: disease state analysis

DESIGN
Mice were infected by intradermal injection of 10^6 T. cruzi trypomastigotes in 100uL of saline split between 2 adjacent sites on the shaved side flank.  Control mice were injected with an equal volume of saline. 24 hours post-injection approximately 75mm^2 of skin immediately surrounding the injection site was excised and RNA was isolated from the tissue. Balb/c mice were used for most experiments and IFN-gamma KO mice were on the Balb/c background. WT 129 mice were also used as IFNAR-/- mice were on the 129 background. In total 33 arrays were performed. 7 WT (Balb/c) control, 3 Y strain infected, 3 Brazil strain infected, 3 G strain infected, 2 IFN-gamma KO control, 2 IFN-gamma KO infected, 1 NK cell depleted control, 1 NK cell depleted infected, 3 WT (129) control, 3 WT (129) infected, 3 IFNAR KO control, 3 IFNAR KO infected

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19201883

