TITLE
Changes in gene expression in the nucleus accumbens of alcohol-preferring rats following chronic ethanol consumption

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
This study investigated changes in gene expression associated with ethanol drinking in adult male P rats under the following conditions for 8 weeks: continuous access (24 hr/day, 7 days/week), multiple scheduled access (three 1-hr sessions during the dark cycle/day, 5 days/week) and ethanol-naive (water). The objective of this study was to investigate changes in gene expression associated with ethanol drinking. Adult male alcohol-preferring (P) rats were given Ethanol in their home-cages under continuous access (CA; 24 hr/day, 7 days/week) or multiple scheduled access (MSA; three 1-hr sessions during the dark cycle/day, 5 days/week) conditions for 8 weeks. A third group was ethanol-naïve (W group). Average ethanol intakes, across the 8 weeks, for the CA and MSA groups were approximately 9.5 and 6.5 g/kg/day, respectively. Fifteen hr after the last ethanol drinking episode, rats were euthanized, the brains rapidly extracted, and the nucleus accumbens (ACB) dissected. RNA was extracted and purified for microarray analysis. The only significant differences, overall, were between the CA and W groups (p < 0.01; Storey false discovery rate = 0.15); there were 374 significant differences in unique named genes between these 2 groups. There were 20 significant Gene Ontology (GO) biological processes categories, which included ‘negative regulation of protein kinase activity’, ‘anti-apoptosis’, and ‘regulation of G-protein-coupled receptor protein signaling pathway’. Ingenuity® analysis indicated a network of transcription factors, involving oncogenes (Fos, Jun, Junb had higher expression levels in the ACB of the CA than W group), suggesting increased neuronal activity in the CA group. There were 13 genes (Hspa5, Stom, Lcn7, Tceb3, Cdc42, Rap1ga1, Ece1, Dhrs3, Plod1, Kif1b, Nmnat1, Srpr, Esam) significantly different between the CA and W groups located within both mouse and rat ethanol QTLs, suggesting that these genes may contribute to ethanol drinking behavior. In conclusion, the robust differences in gene expression found between the CA and W groups, but not observed between the MSA and W groups, may be a result of the higher daily ethanol intakes of the CA group, and/or its initial ethanol withdrawal. Keywords: comparison of gene expression profiles for treated vs. control

