TITLE
Zfx controls BCR-induced proliferation and survival of B lymphocytes

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The development, homeostasis and function of B lymphocytes involve multiple rounds of B cell receptor (BCR)-controlled proliferation and prolonged maintenance. We analyzed the role of transcription factor Zfx, a recently identified regulator of stem cell maintenance, in B cell development and homeostasis. Conditional Zfx deletion in the bone marrow blocked B cell development at the pre-BCR selection checkpoint. Zfx deficiency in peripheral B cells caused impaired generation of the B-1 cell lineage, accelerated B cell turnover, depletion of mature recirculating cells, and delayed T-dependent antibody responses. Zfx-deficient B cells showed normal proximal BCR signaling, but impaired BCR-induced proliferation and survival. This was accompanied by aberrantly enhanced and prolonged integrated stress response, and delayed induction of Cyclin D2 and Bcl-xL proteins. Thus, Zfx restrains the stress response and couples antigen receptor signaling to B cell expansion and maintenance during development and peripheral homeostasis. Keywords: Expression profiling by array

DESIGN
For global gene expression analysis, 2.5 x 105 flow-sorted follicular B cells (B220+ AA4.1- CD23hi CD21int) were cultured in 200 μL B cell media containing 10 μg/mL α-IgM for 0, 2, and 12 hrs.  Cells were harvested in Trizol (Invitrogen). Total RNA was isolated using Trizol (Invitrogen), and 100 ng of each RNA sample were used for reverse transcription and two rounds of linear antisense RNA amplification/labeling (Ambion). The aRNA was amplified without labeling in the first round, and then labeled with Biotin-16-UTP(Roche Applied Sciences) and Biotin-11-CTP (PerkinElmer Life Sciences) in the second round. Labeled aRNA was fragmented in RNA Fragmentation Buffer (QIAGEN) prior to hybridization. Labeled RNA samples (10 ug/array) were hybridized in duplicate to Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays (Affymetrix) at the Columbia University Microarray Project core facility according to the manufacturer's instructions. Quality control and normalization were performed using positive and negative hybridization controls (Affymetrix) spiked into the RNA prior to labeling. Linear amplification of RNA was confirmed for every sample. Array scanning and raw data processing were done using GCOS 1.4 software (Affymetrix).

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19329779

