TITLE
The effect of dietary CLA on mammary tumorigenesis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA), a class of fatty acids found in beef and dairy products, has been shown to inhibit tumorigenesis in a variety of cancer model systems. Based on previously well-documented anti-tumor activity of CLA in rodent models of breast cancer, a pilot study was initiated to examine the effect of dietary CLA in a well-established transgenic model of breast cancer.  Western blots were performed for the detection of AKT, c-Src, ERK1/2, and Cdc24. CLA significantly increased tumor burden (p < 0.1) independent of an increase in oncogenic signaling. Mammary gland whole mounts indicated a loss of mammary adipose and extensive epithelial expansion in CLA-treated animals. Microarray analysis indicated a significant reduction in cytoskeletal related genes with at least a two-fold decrease in five out of six CLA-fed animals compared to untreated controls. Reduction of Cdc42, a key regulator of cell adhesion and cytoskeletal arrangements, was confirmed at the protein level by western blot (p < 0.01). These findings suggest that dietary CLA may advance the malignant phenotype by promoting a loss of cell polarity and adhesion in the mammary gland epithelium. This action may have serious clinical implications for a subset high-risk population and warrants further investigation.

DESIGN
Virgin, four-week-old PyV-mT mice were administered a diet of a mixed-isomer CLA formulation (1% wt/wt) (N=6) or control AIN96G diet (N=5) for four weeks. Measurements of food disappearance, weights and palpations were recorded weekly. All animals were euthanized at eight weeks of age.  Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded mammary gland tissue was used for H & E and trichrome staining and immunohistochemistry for Ki67. Tissue levels of CLA were measured by gas chromatography. Thoracic mammary glands were fixed in glacial acetic acid:ethanol and carmine stained. cDNA microarray was performed on RNA from 6 CLA-fed mice and 4 control mice using the Affymetrix 430 2.0 mouse genome chips.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
20624750

