TITLE
Transcriptional Control by the FATC Domain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Tra1

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
Tra1 is a component of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae SAGA and NuA4 complexes and a member of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) related kinase family that contain a C- terminal PI3K domain followed by a ~ 35-residue FATC domain. We have characterized four alleles with single residue changes in the FATC domain. Of these tra1-L3733A had the most pronounced effects with phenotypes including temperature and cold sensitivity, and reduced growth in media containing ethanol, Calcofluor white, rapamycin, chloramphenicol and geneticin. Tra1-L3733A interacted at normal levels with components of the NuA4 and SAGA complexes, and did not significantly alter histone acetylation patterns. The tra1-L3733A allele resulted in two-fold or greater change in expression of approximately 11% of yeast genes in rich media. Of the 279 genes with increased expression, 175 were ribosomal subunits or involved in ribosomal function or biogenesis. Elevated levels of Pol I and Pol III transcripts were also observed. The phenotypes of the tra1-L3733A overlapped with but were not identical to strains containing deletions of SAGA or NuA4 components or with strains containing mutations in the PI3K domain. Our finding that the double mutant allele, tra1-SRR3413/L3733A with alterations in the PI3K and FATC domains, resulted in wild type growth, suggests a model whereby the FATC domain negatively regulates the activity of the PI3K domain. Expression of genes involved in ribosome biosynthesis, other than the ribosomal subunits themselves, returned to near normal levels in the double mutant strain.  We also characterized tra1-G3745, which contains an additional glycine residue following the normal C-terminal phenylalanine. This allele did not support viability and showed severe dominant negative effects. In contrast to what was observed for tra1-L3733A, tra1-G4745 resulted in decreased expression of genes required for ribosome biogenesis and did not interact with Esa1 or Spt7.

