TITLE
UV- or oxidized lipid treated dermal skin fibroblasts

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Long wavelength Ultraviolet (UVA-1) radiation causes oxidative stress that leads to the formation of noxious substances within the skin. As a defensive mechanism skin cells produce detoxifying enzymes and antioxidants when they detect modified molecules. We have recently shown that UVA-1 irradiation oxidizes the abundant membrane phospholipid 1-palmitoyl-2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphorylcholine (PAPC), which then induced the synthesis of the stress response protein heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) in dermal fibroblasts. Here we examined the effects of UVA-1 and (UV-) oxidized phospholipids on the global gene expression in human dermal fibroblasts. We identified a cluster of genes that were co-induced by UVA-1-oxidized PAPC and UVA-1 radiation. The cluster included HO-1, glutamate-cysteine ligase modifier subunit (GCLM), aldo-keto reductases-1-C1 and -C2 (AKR1C1, AKR1C2), and interleukin 8 (IL8). These genes are members of the cellular stress response system termed “antioxidant response” or “Phase II detoxification”. Accordingly, the regulatory regions of all these genes contain binding sites for NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), a major regulator of the antioxidant response. Both UVA-1 irradiation and treatment with oxidized lipids led to increased nuclear accumulation of Nrf2. Silencing expression of Nrf2 using siRNA or using cells and tissue from Nrf2-deficient mice, we show that the induction of the co-regulated genes was suppressed. Expression of other canonical UVA-1-induced genes, including cyclooxygenase 2 (Cox2) and interleukin 6 (IL6) was unaltered in the absence of Nrf2. Together, our data show that UVA-1-mediated lipid oxidation induces induction of antioxidant response genes, which is dependent on the redox-regulated transcription factor Nrf2. To activate Nrf2 is a major strategy for novel antioxidant drugs, the skin photo-adaptation (SPA) inducers. Our finding that specific uv-oxidized lipids act similar sheds a new (ultraviolet) light on the usually detrimental “image” of UV generated lipid mediators.

DESIGN
we profiled global mRNA expression levels in human dermal fibroblasts that had been treated with either UVA-1 or oxidized lipids. To investigate the effect of oxidized phospholipids on gene regulation, we used two  preparations, which differed in their degree of oxidation; the minimally oxidized UV-PAPC resulting from UVA-1 irradiation of PAPC, and air-oxidized PAPC (OxPAPC), which represents the full spectrum of oxidation products (Gruber 07) (Reis et al., 2005). We irradiated dermal fibroblasts with UVA-1 (40J/cm²) or treated them with UV-PAPC, OxPAPC or native PAPC (100µg/ml each). We analyzed global gene expression four hours after stimulation with gene arrays (Affymetrix U133A Plus 2.0 Gene Chips).

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19720622

