TITLE
Gene expression change in cyclin D1 -/- retinas in comparison to wildtype.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Cyclin D1 belongs to the core cell cycle machinery1, and it is frequently overexpressed in human cancers2.  The full repertoire of cyclin D1 functions in normal development and in cancer cells is currently unknown. To address this question, here we introduce a novel approach that allows one to determine the set of cyclin D1-interacting proteins  (D1 “interactome”) and cyclin D1-bound genomic fragments (D1 “cistrome”) in essentially any mouse organ, at any point of development or at any stage of cancer progression.   Using this approach, we detected several novel tissue-specific interactors of cyclin D1.  A significant number of these partners represent proteins involved in transcription.  We show, using genome-wide location analysis3, that cyclin D1 occupies promoters of a very large number of genes in the developing mouse, where it binds in close proximity to transcription start sites.  Bioinformatics analyses of cyclin D1-bound genomic segments in the developing embryo revealed DNA recognition sequences for several transcription factors.  By querying SAGE libraries4, promoter CpG content5 and gene expression profiles of cyclin D1-null organs, we demonstrate that cyclin D1 binds promoters of highly expressed genes, and that it functions to activate or to repress gene expression in vivo.  Analyses of cyclin D1 transcriptional targets reveal that cyclin D1 contributes to cell proliferation by upregulating genes required for S-phase entry and progression.  Hence, cyclin D1 plays a broad transcriptional regulatory function in vivo during normal mouse development.

DESIGN
We wished to determine whether cyclin D1 functioned to positively or negatively regulate transcription of the target genes (identified by chip-on-chip) in vivo.  To address this question, we asked how expression of cyclin D1-bound genes changes when cyclin D1 has been knocked-out.  We dissected retinas from eyes of cyclin D1-/- or wild-type neonates, isolated RNA and hybridized it onto Affymetrix expression arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
20090754

