TITLE
Transcriptional Regulation of HL60 Neutrophil Differentiation: Promyelocyte trajectory vs. Neutrophil trajectory

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Using the HL60 multipotent promyelocytic leukemia cell line, we performed experiments that lead to two different cell fate attractors by treatments of varying dosage and duration of the differentiation agent all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA). The dosage and duration combinations corresponding to the two treatments were chosen by means of of cytometric measurements of CD11b, a well-known early differentiation marker, such that the two populations are poised at the same stage of differentiation. Using the selected treatment combinations, one population proceeds toward the terminally differentiated neutrophil attractor while the other population reverts back toward the undifferentiated promyelocytic attractor. We monitored the gene expression changes in the two populations after their respective treatments over a period of five days and identified a set of genes that diverged in their expression; a subset of which promotes neutrophil differentiation while the other represses cell cycle progression. By employing promoter based transcription factor binding site analysis, we found enrichment of transcription factors functionally linked to tumor progression, cell cycle, and development. Keywords: Time course, dose response

DESIGN
Untreated HL60 cells are hybrized on the channel 1 with Cy3, ATRA-Treated HL60 cells are hybridized on channel 2 with Cy5. HK60 cells were treated with high dosage/short duration and low dosage/long duration to achieve 55% of CD11b+ cells. These positive cells were then isolated and culture in fresh media and total RNA were isolated for comparison. Cells treated with high dosage/short duration treatment proceed toward the neutrophil attractor while cells treated with the low dosage/long duration treatment revert back toward the promyelocyte attractor.

PLATFORM
GPL1708 Agilent-012391 Whole Human Genome Oligo Microarray G4112A (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
19222862

