TITLE
Genome-Wide Screen of Promoter Methylation Identifies Novel Markers for Tumor Development in Melanoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: DNA methylation is an important component of epigenetic modifications that influences the transcriptional machinery and is aberrant in many human diseases. In particular, dysregulation of promoter methylation in cancer has already been shown to be associated with repression of tumor suppressors and activation of oncogenes. In addition, detection of altered promoter methylation status is suitable for the design of diagnostic or prognostic tests. In this study we present a new methodological approach for the robust identification of promoter methylation markers and the first genome-wide study for the detection of methylation markers in melanoma. Methods and Findings: Genome-wide promoter methylation and gene expression of ten early passage melanoma cell strains are compared to newborn and adult normal melanocytes. For the identification of markers we applied linear mixed effect models (LME) in combination with a series of filters based on the localization of promoter methylation relative to the transcription start site, overall promoter CpG content, and differential gene expression. The aim of this methodology is to identify markers whose promoter differential methylation is likely to be functionally related to differential expression. We identified 76 markers, 68 hyper- and 8-hypo-methylated in melanomas (LME P < 0.05). Promoter methylation profiles and differential expression of five of these markers were successfully validated. In addition, promoter demethylation following Aza treatment consistently restored expression of markers hyper-methylated in melanoma. Conclusions: The proposed methodology allows the identification of robust markers and can be applied to other experimental scenarios where promoter methylation is evaluated. More importantly, the list of markers represents the first systematic effort in the identification of methylation markers in melanoma. Many of the identified markers were not previously known to be regulated by promoter methylation and/or associated with this or other types of cancer.

DESIGN
Genome-wide promoter methylation and gene expression of ten early passage melanoma cell strains are compared to newborn and adult normal melanocytes.

PLATFORM
GPL6484 NimbleGen Homo sapiens HG18 RefSeq promoter array_386K GPL6602 HG17_Human_60mer_1in2

CITATIONS
19491193

