TITLE
Transcriptional profiling of Persea americana flowers

ORGANISM
Persea americana

SUMMARY
The debate on the origin and evolution of flowers has recently entered the field of developmental genetics, with focus on the design of the ancestral floral regulatory program.  Flowers can differ dramatically among angiosperm lineages, but in general, sterile perianth organs surrounding stamens (male reproductive organs) and carpels (female reproductive organs) constitute the basic floral structure. However, the basal angiosperm lineages exhibit spectacular diversity in the number, arrangement, and structure, of floral organs, while the evolutionarily derived monocot and eudicot lineages share a far more uniform floral ground plan. As such, regulatory mechanisms underlying the archetypal floral plan, for instance that of the eudicot genetic model Arabidopsis thaliana, are unlikely to apply to the original flowers. Here we show that broadly overlapping transcriptional programs characterise the floral transcriptome of the basal angiosperm Persea americana (avocado), while floral gene expression domains are typically organ-specific in Arabidopsis. Our findings extend the “fading borders” model for basal angiosperms from organ identity genes to the downstream floral transcriptome, and suggest that the combinatorial mechanism for organ identity may not operate in basal angiosperms as it does in Arabidopsis. Furthermore, fading expression of components of the stamen transcriptome in central and peripheral regions of Persea flowers resembles the developmental program of the hypothesized gymnosperm “floral progenitor”. Accordingly, in contrast to the canalized organ-specific regulatory apparatus of Arabidopsis, floral development may have been originally regulated by overlapping transcriptional cascades with fading gradients of influence from focal to bordering organs.

DESIGN
Expression profiles of inflorescence buds, pre-meiotic floral buds, inner and outer tepals, stamens, carpels, initiating fruit, and leaves were assessed in an interwoven double loop design for eight samples with 16 arrays. Sample materials were collected from two individuals (biological replicates) cultivated on the University of Florida’s Gainesville campus, and RNA was isolated twice for technical replication. Thus, four RNA extractions from each of the eight tissue types listed above were individually labeled with Cy3 (twice) or Cy5 (twice) and hybridized with four other Cy3 or Cy5 labeled samples as a dual channel array system.

PLATFORM
GPL7438 FGP_Persea americana_6K_V1.0

CITATIONS
19451627

