TITLE
Analysis of gene expression response of CLL cells to co-culture with Nurse like cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In the marrow and lymphatic tissues, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells interact with accessory cells that constitute the leukemia microenvironment. In lymphatic tissues, CLL cells are interspersed with CD68+ nurselike cells (NLC) and T cells. However, the mechanism regulating co-localization of CLL cells and these accessory cells are largely unknown. To dissect the molecular cross-talk between CLL and NLC, we profiled the gene expression of CD19-purified CLL cells before and after co-culture with NLC. NLC co-culture induced high-level expression of B cell maturation antigen (BCMA) and two chemoattractants (CCL3, CCL4) by CLL cells. Supernatants from CLL-NLC co-cultures revealed high CCL3/CCL4 protein levels. B cell receptor triggering also induced a robust induction of CCL3 and CCL4 expression by CLL cells, which was almost completely abrogated by a specific Syc inhibitor, R406. High CCL3 and CCL4 plasma levels in CLL patients suggest that activation of this pathway plays a role in vivo. These studies reveal a novel mechanism of cross-talk between CLL cells and their microenvironment, namely the secretion of two T cell chemokines by CLL-NLC interaction and in response to BCR stimulation. Through these chemokines, CLL cells can recruit accessory cells, and thereby actively create a microenvironment that favors their growth and survival.

DESIGN
The microarray part of this study included samples of CLL cells from 9 different patients, analyzed directly after purification and after 14 days of co-culture with Nurse like cells . In detail, RNA was isolated from CD19-purified CLL cells from 9 different patients’ peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) after Ficoll separation and subsequent purification with CD19 MicroBeads and the MACS® technology according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany). For comparison, the same CLL cell samples were co-cultured for 14 days with NLC ( " 14d NLC " ). " ). For co-culture with NLC, PBMC from patients with CLL were suspended in complete RPMI medium (RPMI1640 with 10% FCS, penicillin-streptomycin-glutamine, Gibco-BRL, Grand Island, NY) to a concentration of 1 x 107/ml (total 20 ml) and incubated for 14 days in 75 cm2 tissue culture flasks (Techno Plastic Products AG) as described previously3. Nonadherent lymphoid cells then were removed and the NLC layer was washed two times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The complete removal of lymphocytes was verified by phase-contrast microscopy. The nonadherent cells together with the wash-fractions were then used for RNA preparation. In order to purify the CLL B cells prior to RNA isolation, CLL PBMC were passed through a 30 µm nylon mesh to obtain a single-cell suspension. Then CLL B cells were purified with CD19 MicroBeads. Subsequently RNA was extracted.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19074730

