TITLE
Sigma(M) regulated genes under antibiotic stress (vancomycin)

ORGANISM
Bacillus subtilis

SUMMARY
Abstract of associated manuscript: The Bacillus subtilis extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma(M) factor is activated by cell envelope stress elicited by antibiotics, and by acid, heat, ethanol and superoxide stresses. Here, we have used several complementary approaches to identify genes controlled by sigma(M). In many cases, expression is only partially dependent on sigma(M) because of both overlapping promoter recognition with other ECF sigma factors and the presence of additional promoter elements. Genes regulated by sigma(M) have a characteristic pattern of induction in response to cell envelope-acting antibiotics as evidenced by hierarchical clustering analysis. sigma(M) also contributes to the expression of the Spx transcription factor and thereby indirectly regulates genes of the Spx regulon. Cell envelope stress responses also include regulons controlled by sigma(W), sigma(B) and several two-component regulatory systems (e.g. LiaRS, YycFG, BceRS). Activation of the sigma(M) regulon increases expression of proteins functioning in transcriptional control, cell wall synthesis and shape determination, cell division, DNA damage monitoring, recombinational repair and detoxification.

DESIGN
WT (-van) vs. WT (+van), sigM (-van) vs. sigM (+van), WT (-van) vs. sigM (-van), WT (+van) vs. sigM (+van), WT (-van) vs. spx (-van), WT (+van) vs. spx (+van). Each experiment was conducted at least twice using two independent total RNA preparations. For vancomycin untreated and treated experiments, untreated samples were labeled with Alexa Fluor 555 and treated samples with Alexa Fluor 647. For WT vs. mutant experiments, wild type was labeled with Alexa Fluor 555 and mutants with Alexa Fluor 647. For dye swap experiment, wild-type was labeled with Alexa Fluor 647 and mutant with Alexa Fluor 555. Bacillus subtilis CU1065, WT (-van) vs. WT (+van), sigM (-van) vs. sigM (+van), WT (-van) vs. sigM (-van), WT (+van) vs. sigM (+van), WT (-van) vs. spx (-van), WT (+van) vs. spx (+van)

PLATFORM
GPL7420 Sigma Genosys Panorama Bacillus subtilis Gene Array

CITATIONS
18179421

