TITLE
microRNA-1 negatively regulates expression of the hypertrophy-associated genes calmodulin and Mef2a

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Calcium signaling is a central regulator of cardiomyocyte growth and function. Calmodulin is a critical mediator of calcium signals. Because the amount of calmodulin within cardiomyocytes is limiting, precise regulation of calmodulin expression may be an important for regulation of calcium signaling. In this study, we show for the first time that calmodulin levels are regulated post-transcriptionally in heart failure. The cardiomyocyte-restricted microRNA miR-1 inhibited translation of calmodulin-encoding mRNAs via highly conserved target sites within their 3’-untranslated regions. In keeping with its effect on calmodulin expression, miR-1 downregulated calcium-calmodulin signaling through the calcineurin to NFAT. miR-1 also negatively regulated expression of Mef2a and Gata4, key transcription factors that mediate calcium-dependent changes in gene expression. Consistent with downregulation of these hypertrophy-associated genes, miR-1 attenuated cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in cultured neonatal rat cardiomyocytes and in the intact adult heart. Our data indicate that miR-1 regulates cardiomyocyte growth responses by negatively regulating the calcium-signaling components calmodulin, Mef2a, and Gata4.

DESIGN
We show that miR-1 is downregulated in a murine heart failure model. miRNAs expression changes were measured in calcineurin transgenic model of heart failure and control mice using a Luminex platform. Reduced miR-1 expression was associated with broad alteration in expression of predicted target genes. To test this, we measured miRs including miR-1 and genome wide transcriptome changes in vivo and in vitro system. Calcineurin transgenic heart was compared to nontransgenic heart (NTg vs. CNTg). We also investigated the gene expression changes during the course of cardiomyocytes differentiation using DMSO treated P19CL6 cell lines. Two time points (day 6 and day 10) were compared to identified the gene expression changes of predicted miR-1 targets (Day 6 vs. Day 10).

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array GPL8225 Luminex Mus musculus 0.2K microRNA

CITATIONS
19188439

