TITLE
Microarray analysis of the regulation of TNFalpha-stimulated PGE2 production in gingival fibroblasts

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) is involved in several inflammatory conditions including periodontitis. The aim of this study was to investigate the global gene expression profile of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) stimulated human gingival fibroblasts, focusing on signal pathways related to PGE2 production and the new PGE2-synthesizing enzymes, prostaglandin E synthases (PGES). The expression of microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1 (mPGES-1) as well as the upstream cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) was up-regulated by TNFalpha, accompanied by increased PGE2 production. In contrast, the expression of microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-2 (mPGES-2) and cytosolic prostaglandin E synthase (cPGES) was unaffected by TNFalpha. Using microarray analysis in a time-course factorial design including time points 1, 3 and 6 h, we identified differentially expressed genes in response to TNFalpha treatment. Enrichment analysis of microarray data identified two positively regulated signal transduction pathways: c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and Nuclear Factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB). We used specific inhibitors and phosphorylation analysis to confirm their role in PGE2 regulation. Both JNK and NF-kappaB inhibitors reduced the TNFalpha-stimulated up-regulation of mPGES-1 and COX-2 as well as subsequent PGE2 production. The novel finding that TNFalpha-stimulated mPGES-1 is regulated by JNK suggests this kinase as a potential future target for treatment strategies in inflammatory disorders, including periodontitis. Keywords: Time course, gene expression, factorial design.

DESIGN
Three human gingival fibroblast cell lines were established from gingival biopsies obtained from 3 healthy patients, 3 to 12 years of age, with no clinical signs of periodontal disease. Cells were incubated with or without TNF-alpha (20 ng/ml) for 1, 3 or 6h. After incubation for 1, 3 or 6 h in the two conditions, the cells were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at -70°C for subsequent isolation of total RNA. The experimental design of the microarray study was set up as a time-course factorial design, to best observe the TNF-alpha induced gene expression changes over time. C++ program (G.F. Glonek, P.J. Solomon, Factorial and time course designs for cDNA microarray experiments, Biostatistics 5 (2004) 89-111) was used to determine the exact layout of the design in order to estimate the interaction effect between treatment and time, i.e. genes that are differentially expressed over time, with optimal statistical efficiency. Cyanine 5 and cyanine 3 were used for labeling. For each cell line 12 hybridizations were performed in a time-course factorial design. In total, 36 hybridizations were performed.

PLATFORM
GPL7768 KTH Human 30k v1.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

