TITLE
Global gene expression profiles in Oct4-knockdown and Ccna2-knockdown mouse embryos.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Gene regulation at the maternal-embryonic transition in the pre-implantation mouse embryo is not well understood.  We knock down Ccna2 to establish proof-of-concept that antisense morpholino oligonucleotides can be used to target specific genes.  We applied this strategy to study Oct4 and discovered that Oct4 is required prior to blastocyst development.  Specifically, gene expression is altered as early as the 2-cell stage in Oct4-knockdown embryos. Distinct subsets of genes are differentially expressed between Oct4 and Ccna2-knockdown embryos, and indicated differential functions.  Further, a large panel of genes were confirmed to be differentially-expressed in Oct4-knockdown embryos by quantitative, real time RT-PCR. Keywords: gene knockdown

DESIGN
3-5 week old wild type F1 (C57BL6xDBA/2) females (Charles River) were superovulated by intraperitonial injections of 5 IU of pregnant mare’s serum gonadotropin (Sigma) followed by 5 IU of human chorionic gonadotropin (Sigma) 48 hours later, and mated overnight with wild type males. Mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation 17 hours after hCG injection, and 1-cell embryos were released from oviducts. Cumulus cells were removed by hyaluronidase (Sigma) treatment and pipetting. Pre-implantation embryos at the two pronuclei stage were recovered, pooled from 3-6 females in M2 media (Chemicon International), followed by immediate cytoplasmic microinjection of gene-specific antisense morpholino oligonucleotides and culture in Human Tubal Fluid with 10% serum supplement (In-Vitro Fertilization, Inc.) microdrops under mineral oil (Sigma) in mixed gas (90% nitrogen, 5% oxygen, 5% carbon dioxide; Praxair) at 37°C, and cultured at ten embryos per 20 μL drop. Uninjected control embryos derived from the same embryo pool, and were placed in identical conditions in parallel, except that they were not injected.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19129941

