TITLE
PAX2: A Potential Biomarker for Low Malignant Potential Ovarian Tumors and Low-Grade Serous Ovarian Carcinomas

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Objective: Ovarian tumors of low-malignant potential (LMP) and low-grade serous ovarian carcinomas are thought to represent different stages on a tumorigenic continuum and to develop along pathways distinct from that of high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma.  Past studies have utilized gene expression profiles to support this theory.  The objective of the current study was to identify new genes whose expression profiles in LMP ovarian tumors and low-grade ovarian carcinomas differ from that in high-grade ovarian carcinomas. Methods: We used RNA from 3 normal human ovarian surface epithelia (HOSE) and from 10 low-grade and 10 high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma samples to perform gene expression profiling. Using real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), we evaluated changes in PAX2 mRNA expression in cDNA created from RNA extracted from an independent set of ovarian tissue samples (7 LMP tumors and 17 low-grade and 23 high-grade serous carcinomas).  We also examined  PAX2 expression using Western blot analysis of protein extracted from a set of ovarian LMP and low- and high-grade carcinoma tissue samples.  Additionally, we used immunohistochemistry (IHC) to validate PAX2 overexpression in a third independent set of paraffin ovarian tissue sections from 17 LMP tumors and 16 low- and 257 high-grade carcinomas. Results:  Gene profiling revealed higher expression of PAX2 in low-grade than in high-grade ovarian carcinomas.  Real-time RT-PCR demonstrated a statistically significant difference in median PAX2 mRNA expression, expressed as fold change, among ovarian LMP tumor (1837.38), low-grade (183.12), and high-grade (3.72) carcinoma samples (p=0.015).  Western blot analysis revealed strong PAX2 expression in ovarian LMP and low-grade carcinoma samples but no PAX2 protein expression in high-grade carcinomas. On IHC, more LMP tumor and low-grade carcinoma samples expressed moderate to high levels of PAX2 than did high-grade ovarian carcinoma samples. The numbers of samples with strong nuclear staining was significantly higher for ovarian LMP tumors (10 of 17, p < 0.001) and low-grade serous carcinomas (10 of 16, p < 0.001) than for high-grade carcinomas (27 of 257). Discussion:  Our identification and validation of higher PAX2 expression in ovarian LMP tumors and low-grade serous carcinomas than in high-grade carcinomas supports the two-tiered hypothesis that the first two are on a continuum and are distinct from high-grade ovarian carcinomas.  PAX2 may represent a potential biomarker and future therapeutic target for individualizing chemotherapy for ovarian LMP tumors and low-grade carcinomas in the future.

DESIGN
We used RNA from 3 normal human ovarian surface epithelia (HOSE) and from 10 low-grade and 10 high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma samples to perform gene expression profiling. Using real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), we evaluated changes in PAX2 mRNA expression in cDNA created from RNA extracted from an independent set of ovarian tissue samples (7 LMP tumors and 17 low-grade and 23 high-grade serous carcinomas).  We also examined  PAX2 expression using Western blot analysis of protein extracted from a set of ovarian LMP and low- and high-grade carcinoma tissue samples.  Additionally, we used immunohistochemistry (IHC) to validate PAX2 overexpression in a third independent set of paraffin ovarian tissue sections from 17 LMP tumors and 16 low- and 257 high-grade carcinomas.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19525924

