TITLE
Global analysis of alternative splicing regulation by insulin and wingless signalling in Drosophila cells

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Background: Despite the prevalence and biological relevance of both signalling pathways and alternative pre-mRNA splicing, our knowledge of how intracellular signalling impacts on alternative splicing regulation remains fragmentary. We report a genome-wide analysis of changes in alternative splicing using splicing-sensitive microarrays, induced by activation of two distinct signalling pathways, insulin and wingless, in Drosophila cells in culture. Results: Alternative splicing changes induced by insulin affect more than 150 genes and more than 50 genes are regulated by wingless activation. About 40% of the genes showing changes in alternative splicing also show regulation of mRNA levels, suggesting distinct but also significantly overlapping programs of transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation. Distinct functional sets of genes are regulated by each pathway and, remarkably, a significant overlap is observed between functional categories of genes regulated transcriptionally and at the level of alternative splicing. Functions related with carbohydrate metabolism and cellular signalling are enriched among genes regulated by insulin and wingless, respectively. Computational searches identify pathway-specific sequence motifs enriched near regulated 5’ splice sites. Conclusion: Taken together, our data indicate that signalling cascades trigger pathway-specific and biologically coherent regulatory programs of alternative splicing regulation. They also reveal that alternative splicing can provide a novel molecular mechanism for cross-talk between different signalling pathways.

DESIGN
To monitor transcriptional and alternative splicing changes induced by activation of the insulin and wingless pathways, a custom-designed microarray platform was employed featuring probes for all Drosophila genes for which different mRNA isoforms generated by alternative splicing have been described (see Blanchette M, Green RE, Brenner SE, Rio DC: Global analysis of positive and negative pre-mRNA splicing regulators in Drosophila. Genes Dev 2005, 19(11):1306-1314.). Three biological replicates of total RNA isolated after pathway activation or controls (untreated cells for insulin, control dsRNA for wingless) were purified, reverse transcribed into cDNA and labelled with Cy5 or Cy3 fluorochromes and the cDNA was hybridized to the microarray,

PLATFORM
GPL7508 Blanchette/Green Splice Junction array

CITATIONS
19178699

