TITLE
Genotype profiling of primitive neuroectodermal tumours (250K_Nsp_SNP and 250K_Sty_SNP)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Primitive neuro-ectodermal tumours (PNET) of the supratentorial region are rare, highly malignant embryonal brain tumours affecting young children. Although supratentorial PNET (sPNET) are histologically similar to infratentorial PNET/medulloblastoma, sPNET have more aggressive clinical phenotypes, which suggest sPNET represents distinct biological entities. In contrast to considerable progress in understanding the signalling pathways involved in medulloblastoma, little is known about sPNET pathogenesis. Prior low resolution CGH (comparative genomic hybridization) studies indicate sPNET have frequent genomic imbalances and copy number aberrations (CNAs). To define genes involved in sPNET pathogenesis, we utilized the Affymetrix 250K Nsp SNP (single nucleotide polymorphism) analysis to identify genes targeted by recurrent CNAs in primary human sPNET samples. Copy number analysis was conducted on 39 primary PNET samples. Select target genes were validated by genomic and/or RT-PCR. Our analysis revealed frequent CNA across the sPNET genome, encompassing large and focal chromosome segments, and corroborated previous reports that isochromosome 17q, an abnormality found in ~ 30% of medulloblastoma, is rare in sPNET. Keywords: single nucleotide polymorphism array, disease state analysis

DESIGN
A total of 56 primary sPNET samples were collected for this study from The Hospital for Sick Children, John Hopkins University, St. Jude Research Hospital, University of Cambridge, Children’s Hospital Boston, Virginia Commonwealth University, Instituto nazionale per lo studio e la cura dei tumori, and Texas Children’s Hospital, with local Institutional Research Ethics Board approval. Pineoblastoma and rhaboid tumours were specifically excluded, leaving 52 samples, 39 of which had good quality DNA available. These samples, in addition to 28 diploid reference samples (a gift from Dr. S. Scherer, University of Toronto), were analyzed on the Affymetrix GeneChip Mapping 250K Nsp SNP array. Due to sample availability at the time the arrays were run, the diploid reference samples analyzed on the Sty arrays are different from reference samples analyzed on the Nsp arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL3718 [Mapping250K_Nsp] Affymetrix Mapping 250K Nsp SNP Array GPL3720 [Mapping250K_Sty] Affymetrix Mapping 250K Sty2 SNP Array

CITATIONS
19962671

