TITLE
Hybrid_Poplar_H11-11_Leaves_Local_Stress_Response_DataSet3

ORGANISM
Populus trichocarpa x Populus deltoides

SUMMARY
We investigated the transcriptional response of hybrid poplar (Populus trichocarpa x deltoides) leaves to a variety of stress treatments (insect feeding by Malacosoma disstria larvae, mechanical wounding, wounding plus the application of insect oral secretions, and methyl jasmonate spray) over a 24 hour time course. Experiments were conducted using clonal trees under greenhouse conditions at the University of British Columbia. We used the 15.5K poplar cDNA microarray platform previously described by Ralph et al. (Molecular Ecology 2006, 15:1275-1297). Differentially expressed genes were determined using three criteria: fold-change between treated and untreated control leaves > 1.5-fold, P value < 0.05 and Q value < 0.05. This study identified > 1,000 differentially expressed genes in response to insect feeding and/or treatments that mimic insect feeding damage.

DESIGN
For each stress treatment, we compared RNA from leaves of four individual treated trees versus four individual control trees, with dye balance, using a total of 16 slides for the four treatments examined.  Based on an earlier study using pooled biological replicates (90 trees) to examine a large combination of 18 treatments and time points, we selected the peak response time point for each treatment for further investigation using individual tree replicates.  The time points and treatments examined were as follows: 24 hours for insect feeding, 6 hours for mechanical wounding, and 2 hours for both wouding plus oral secretions and methyl jasmonate.  In the original experiment, leaves were harvested 2, 6 or 24 hours after the initiation of each treatment.  For each tree, the lowest five mature leaves were caged in nylon mesh bags, treated or left untreated as a control.  As a control for methyl jasmonate treatments, we used a tween solvent.

PLATFORM
GPL5921 Treenomix poplar 15.5K cDNA microarray

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

