TITLE
Effects of trenbolone, flutamide and a mix of both in fathead minnow ovaries

ORGANISM
Pimephales promelas

SUMMARY
Trenbolone and flutamide are prototypical model compounds for respectively androgen and anti-androgen modes of action.  Trenbolone is an anabolic steroid used in cattle industry to increase weight gain and feed efficiency, and flutamide is a pharmaceutical used to treat prostate cancer.  Androgens exert profound effects on the organization, development, and function of the male reproductive system through activation of androgen receptors (ARs).  Flutamide, as an antiandrogen, was expected to temper the effects of trenbolone on androgen receptor (AR)-mediated gene expression.  Female fathead minnows (Pimephales promelas) were exposed via the water to 0.05, 0.5 or 5 µg 17β-trenbolone/L; 50, 150 or 500 µg flutamide/L; or to a mixture of 0.5 μg/L trenbolone and 500 μg/L flutamide.  After a 48 hr constant exposure gene expression in gonads was analyzed using a fathead minnow-specific 22,000-gene microarray.  Trenbolone significantly changed the expression (P < 0.05) of roughly 750 different genes, while flutamide changed the expression of 1420 genes.  Most of the genes that were regulated were distinct for the two chemicals.  However, 70 genes were reciprocally regulated by the two treatments.  Myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homolog (Myc), Yin Yang 1 (YY1) and interferon regulator factor 1 (IRF1) were among the important transcription factors reciprocally regulated by trenbolone and flutamide, suggesting they may be specifically regulated by the AR.  These regulatory molecules, in conjunction with other reciprocally regulated transcription factors, may function as early molecular switches to control phenotypic changes in gonad tissue architecture and function.

DESIGN
Fathead minnows exposed for 48h to 0.5 ug trenbolone, 500 ug flutamide, or  a mixture of both.

PLATFORM
GPL7282 EcoArray Fathead minnow 44K v1.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

