TITLE
Folsomia candida exposed to soil containing different phenanthrene concentrations

ORGANISM
Folsomia candida

SUMMARY
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are common pollutants in soil, have negative effects on soil ecosystems, and are potentially carcinogenic. The Springtail (Collembola) Folsomia candida is often used as an indicator species for soil toxicity. Here we report a toxicogenomic study that translates the ecological effects of the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon phenanthrene in soil to the early transcriptomic responses in Folsomia candida. Microarrays were used to examine two different exposure concentrations of phenanthrene, namely the EC10 (24.95 mg kg-1 soil) and EC50 (45.80 mg kg-1 soil) on reproduction of this springtail, which evoked 405 and 251 differentially expressed transcripts, respectively. Fifty transcripts were differential in response to either concentration. Many transcripts encoding xenobiotic detoxification and biotransformation enzymes (phases I, II, and III) were upregulated in response to either concentration. Furthermore, indications of general and oxidative stress were found in response to phenanthrene. Chitin metabolism appeared to be disrupted particularly at the low concentration, and protein translation appeared suppressed at the high concentration of phenanthrene; most likely in order to reallocate energy budgets for the detoxification process. Finally, an immune response was evoked especially in response to the high effect concentration, which was also described in a previous transcriptomic study using the same effect concentration (EC50) of cadmium. Our study provides new insights in the molecular mode of action of the important polluting class of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in soil animals. Furthermore, we present a fast, sensitive, and specific soil toxicity test which enhances traditional tests and may help to improve current environmental risk assessments and monitoring of potentially polluted sites.

DESIGN
Folsomia candida was exposed to phenanthrene spiked soil or untreated (reference/control) soil for 2 days. Two different concentrations of phenanthrene were used, 24.95 and 45.80 mg/kg soil which represent the EC10 and EC50 on reproduction, respectively. For each concentration treatment 4 biological replicates were used, replicate samples consisted of total RNA extracted from ~30 animals exposed in the same jar to either reference or phenanthrene spiked soil. Phenanthrene treated samples were always hybridized to reference samples in an evenly distributed dye-swap manner, which resulted in total in 8 hybridizations of 16 samples.

PLATFORM
GPL7150 ISQ Chip Folsomia candida Collembola VU 15.7K version 2.0

CITATIONS
19457238

