TITLE
Transcription factor Achaete scute-like 2 (Ascl2) controls intestinal stem cell fate

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The small intestinal epithelium is the most rapidly self-renewing tissue of mammals. Proliferative cells are confined to crypts, while differentiated cell types predominantly occupy the villi. We recently demonstrated the existence of a long-lived pool of cycling stem cells defined by Lgr5 expression and intermingled with post-mitotic Paneth cells at crypt bottoms. We have now determined a gene signature for these so called Crypt Base Columnar (CBC) cells. One of the genes within this stem cell signature is the Wnt target Ascl2. Transgenic expression of the Ascl2 transcription factor throughout the intestinal epithelium induces crypt hyperplasia and de novo crypt formation on villi. Induced deletion of the Ascl2 gene in adult small intestine leads to disappearance of the CBC stem cells within days. The combined results from these gain- and loss-of-function experiments imply that Ascl2 controls intestinal stem cell fate. Keywords: expression profiling

DESIGN
For the stem cell signature we used cell fractions of intestines from Lgr5-EGFP-ires-CreERT2 mice, expressing GFP under the control of the Lgr5 promoter. RNA was isolated from two FACS sorted cell populations, one expressing GFP at high levels (GFPhi) and the other expressing GFP at low levels (GFPlo). For the analysis of Ascl2 target genes RNA was isolated from intestinal epithelial cells of Ah-Cre/Ascl2floxed/floxed animals and Ah-Cre/Ascl2floxed/wt control animals 3 and 5 days post induction. Differentially labelled cRNA from GFPhi and GFPlo cells from two different sorts (each combining three different mice) were hybridised on 4X44K Agilent Whole Mouse Genome dual colour Microarrays (G4122F) in two dye swap experiments, resulting in four individual arrays. For the Ascl2 target gene analysis we analyzed the 3 and 5 days PI experiments in two dye swap experiments, resulting in four individual arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
19269367

