TITLE
Genome wide identification of targets of the drosha-pasha/DGCR8 complex

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Drosha is a type III RNAse, which plays a critical role in miRNA biogenesis. Drosha and its double-stranded RNA-binding partner protein Pasha/DGCR8 likely recognize and cleave miRNA precursor RNAs or pri-miRNA hairpins co-transcriptionally. To identify RNAs processed by Drosha, we used tiling microarrays to examine transcripts after depletion of drosha mRNA with dsRNA in Drosophila Schneider S2 cells. This strategy identified 137 Drosha-regulated RNAs, including 11 putative pri-miRNAs comprising 15 annotated miRNAs. Most of the identified pri-miRNAs seem extremely large, > 10 kilobases as revealed by both the Drosha knock down strategy and by RNA PolII chromatin IP followed by Drosophila tiling microarrays. Surprisingly, more than a hundred additional RNAs not annotated as miRNAs are under Drosha control and are likely to be direct targets of Drosha action. This is because many of them encode annotated genes, and unlike bona fide pri-miRNAs, they are not affected by depletion of the miRNA processing factor, dicer-1. Moreover, application of the evofold analysis software indicates that at least 25 of the Drosha-regulated RNAs contain evolutionarily conserved hairpins similar to those recognized by the Drosha-Pasha/DGCR8 complex in pri-miRNAs. One of these hairpins is located in the 5′ UTR of both pasha and mammalian DGCR8. These observations suggest that a negative feedback loop acting on pasha mRNA may regulate the miRNA-biogenesis pathway: i.e., excess Drosha cleaves pasha/DGCR8 primary transcripts and leads to a reduction in pasha/DGCR8 mRNA levels and Pasha/DGCR8 synthesis. Keywords: time course, ChIP-chip

DESIGN
S2 cells were depleted of drosha or dicer mRNA with dsRNA.  Total RNA was then converted to cDNA and hybridized to Affymetrix tiling arrays to identify pri-miRNAs and drosha regulated RNAs.  RNA PolII chromatin IP genomic DNA was also hybridized to Affymetix tiling arrays to support pri-miRNA targets from drosha knockdowns. Two replicates were used for each sample.

PLATFORM
GPL5919 [Dm35b_MR] Affymetrix Drosophila Tiling 1.0R Array GPL6629 [DM_tiling2_MR] Affymetrix Drosophila Tiling 2.0R Array

CITATIONS
19223442

