TITLE
Transcriptional profiling of equine chondrocyte de-differentiation in culture

ORGANISM
Equus caballus

SUMMARY
Monolayer cultures of primary chondrocytes undergo morphological changes that have been broadly characterized as de-differentiation. Transcriptional profiling was used to evaluate changes in gene expression during this process. Articular cartilage was harvested from a single Standardbred horse; the chondrocytes were isolated and then maintained in monolayer culture for up to 14 days. Chondrocytes were collected on Day 1 and Day 14 of culture and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Total RNA was isolated, subjected to one round of linear RNA amplification, and then applied to an equine-specific cDNA microarray composed of 9322 elements. Three biological replicates were analyzed at each time point using a dye-swap experimental design. One hundred six transcripts were present at levels greater than or equal to five-fold higher in Day 1 chondrocytes relative to the cells collected at Day 14. Conversely, 68 transcripts were present at levels greater than or equal to five-fold higher in Day 14 chondrocytes. Northern blot hybridization validated the microarray data by confirming the down-regulation of steady state mRNA levels for type II procollagen and aggrecan core protein and the up-regulation of type I procollagen. Gene-by-gene and cluster analyses will be used to compare the process of “de-differentiation” in primary culture to the developmental stages of normal chondrocyte differentiation and to the fibrocartilage repair tissue that forms in osteoarthritic lesions. Keywords: articular cartilage, de-differentiation, horse, cDNA microarray

DESIGN
This is a direct comparison between one and fourteen day cultured chondrocyte transcriptomes. Three sets of technical replicates were compared. For each comparison and its dye-swap, one Day 1 technical replicate was randomly compared to one Day 14 technical replicate.

PLATFORM
GPL6423 MacLeod custom equine cartilage cDNA microarray

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

