TITLE
The microstructural, mineralogical and transcriptional developments of shell biomineralization of Pinctada maxima

ORGANISM
Pinctada maxima

SUMMARY
Molluscan larval ontogeny is a highly conserved process typical of 3 principal developmental stages. A characteristic unique to each of these stages is shell design, termed prodissoconch I, prodissoconch II and dissoconch. These shells vary in morphology, mineralogy and microstructure. The discrete temporal transitions in shell biomineralization between these larval stages are utilized in this study to investigate transcriptional involvement in several distinct biomineralization events. Scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction analysis of P. maxima larvae and juveniles collected throughout post-embryonic ontogenesis, document the mineralogy and microstructure of each shelled stage as well as establishing a timeline for transitions in biomineralization. P. maxima larval samples most representative of these biomineralization distinctions and transitions were analyzed for differential gene expression on the microarray platform PmaxArray 1.0. A number of transcripts are reported as differentially expressed in correlation to the mineralization events of P. maxima larval ontogeny. Some of those isolated are known shell matrix genes while others are novel, these are discussed in relation to potential shell formation roles. This interdisciplinary investigation has married the shell developments of P. maxima larval ontogeny with corresponding gene expression profiles, furthering the elucidation of shell biomineralization. Keywords: Temporal expression profiling by array

DESIGN
Microarray is used to examine the temporal differential expression of transcripts from several bivalve larval development stages including 24hrs post fertilization, 3 days, 17 days, 20 days, 23 days, 26 days, 30 days, 35 days, 40 days. Differential expression profiles for transcripts of all the temporal samples was determined based on comparison to a common reference of unfertilized eggs. Each temporal larval sample included in the study has at least 3 replicate hybridizations. Dye flips have been incorporated in the replicates. A total of 46 microarray hybridizations were performed in this investigation for differential expression analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL7792 Pinctada maxima 5K

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

