TITLE
Differential expression analysis of genes from the mantle tissue of pearl oyster: Pinctada maxima

ORGANISM
Pinctada maxima

SUMMARY
The mantle is a thin tissue from which proteins are secreted dictating the mollusk shell construction. As a conserved organ involved in shell formation throughout mollusks, the mantle is an excellent foundation from which to study biomineralization. A P. maxima mantle tissue specific cDNA microarray, termed PmaxArray 1.0, has been developed comprising 5000 cDNA transcripts derived from the mantle tissue of P. maxima. This tool has been used to investigate the spatial functional dynamics of the mantle tissue identifying over 2000 PmaxArray 1.0 spots as differentially expressed spatially within this organ. Gene expression profiles observed for these transcripts indicated 5 major spatial functions for the mantle, 3 of which have been putatively attributed to shell formation roles associated with nacre microstructure, calcite prismatic microstructure and periostracum. These transcripts are further examined with in situ expression localization and comparative sequence analyses in reference to potential shell formation roles. This spatial investigation has expedited the elucidation of functions within the dynamic mantle organ, paying particular attention to of shell biomineralization. Keywords: Spatial expression profiling by array

DESIGN
The mantle tissue from 9 animals was dissected into 5 separate sections: outer fold (OF), middle fold (MF), inner fold (IF), ventral mantle tissue (VM) and dorsal mantle tissue (DM). Total RNA was extracted from these tissues and pooled across subjects in order to reduce the effect of biological variation; such that 3 individuals were pooled together totaling 3 pooled replicate samples for each tissue. All the biologically pooled tissue types were compared against a common reference in which total RNA from all tissues types and all nine animals was equally pooled. A total of 30 dual channel microarrays hybridizations were performed and analyzed.

PLATFORM
GPL7792 Pinctada maxima 5K

CITATIONS
21936921

