TITLE
Compartmental Localization and Clinical Relevance of MICA Antibodies after Renal Transplantation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Studies recently support that non-HLA antigens could be additional targets of injury in organ transplant recipients, and MICA was associated with an increased risk of graft loss. Methods: A ProtoArray platform was used to study 37 serum samples from 22 unique patients (15 renal recipients and 7 healthy controls). Thirty paired pre- and post-transplant serum samples were analyzed for detection of de novo post-transplant antibody responses in the 15 patients (10 acute rejection (AR), 5 Stable). Probes on ProtoArray and cDNA platforms (GSE: 3931) were re-annotated and compartment specific gene lists were analyzed using the integrated genomics method. Normal and transplant kidney IHC were performed for MICA antigen localization. Results: Mean MICA-Ab (antibody) signal intensity was significantly higher in transplant patients compared with healthy controls and de novo MICA-Ab were detected in 73% transplant patients. The mean post-transplant signal intensity of MICA-Ab was the highest in C4d+AR. Detection of MICA-Ab responses did not correlate with time post-transplantation, but significantly correlated with decline in graft function over the subsequent year. Integrative genomics predicted localization of the MICA antigen to the glomerulus.  IHC confirmed cytoplasmic MICA staining solely in glomerular podocytes in normal kidney. In the transplant kidney, infiltrating mononuclear lymphocytes (T, B and NK) in AR had additional MICA staining. Conclusions: MICA can be highly detected regardless of graft dysfunction or AR. The intensity signal of the MICA antibody correlates with subsequent decline in graft function. The MICA antigen localizes to the glomerulus and infiltrating mononuclear cells in AR.

DESIGN
Pre- and post-transplant serum antibodies were profiled for each patient, using the Invitrogen ProtoArray® Human Protein Microarray v3.0 platform (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). This platform contains 5,056 non-redundant human proteins expressed in a baculovirus system, purified from insect cells and printed in duplicate onto a nitrocellulose-coated glass slide. Each protein is spotted twice on each array, to measure the quality of the signal intensity. Details for experiment processing and analysis follow the previous publication from our group (13). Prospector software was used to retrieve the expression based on immune response profiling of the .gal files.

PLATFORM
GPL6454 ProtoArray Human Protein Microarray v3.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

