TITLE
Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy (1-color design)

ORGANISM
Canis lupus familiaris

SUMMARY
Objectives: To test whether (1) electromechanical dyssynchrony induces region-specific alterations in the myocardial transcriptome and (2) dyssynchrony-induced gene expression changes can be corrected by cardiac resynchronization (CRT). Background: To date, CRT is the only heart failure treatment that can both acutely and chronically increase systolic function and prolong survival, something not yet achieved by a drug therapy. However, the mechanisms underlying the benefits of CRT remain elusive. Methods: Adult dogs underwent left bundle branch ablation (LBBB) and right atrial pacing at 200 bpm for either 6 weeks (dyssynchronous heart failure, DHF, n=12) or 3 weeks followed by 3 weeks of resynchronization by bi-ventricular pacing at the same pacing rate (CRT, n=10). Control animals without LBBB were not paced (NF, n=14). Echocardiography and invasive hemodynamic measurements were performed at 3 and 6 weeks. At 6 weeks, RNA was isolated from the anterior and lateral LV walls and hybridized onto canine-specific 44K microarrays. Results: In DHF, transcriptional changes consistent with re-expression of a fetal gene program were primarily observed in the anterior LV, resulting in increased regional heterogeneity of gene expression within the left ventricle. Dyssynchrony-induced region-specific expression changes in 1050 transcripts were reversed by CRT to levels of NF hearts (false discovery rate < 5%). CRT remodeled transcripts with metabolic and cell signaling function and greatly reduced regional heterogeneity of gene expression compared with DHF. Conclusions: Our results demonstrate a profound effect of electromechanical dyssynchrony on the regional cardiac transcriptome, causing gene expression changes primarily in the anterior LV wall. CRT corrected the alterations in gene expression in the anterior wall by reversing the fetal gene expression pattern, supporting a global effect of biventricular pacing on the ventricular transcriptome that extends beyond the pacing site in the lateral wall.

