TITLE
Expression data from WT and Aire deficient mTECs

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Aire is an important transcription regulator that mediates a role in central tolerance via promoting the promiscuous expression of tissue-specific antigens in the thymus. Although several mouse models of Aire-deficiency have been described, none has analysed the phenotype induced by a mutation that emulates the common 13bp deletion in human APECED by disrupting the first PHD domain in exon 8. Aire-deficient mice with a corresponding mutation showed some disturbance of the medullary epithelial compartment, but at the phenotypic level their T cell compartment appeared relatively normal in the thymus and periphery. An increase in the number of activated T cells was evident, and autoantibodies against several organs were detected. At the histological level, lymphocytic infiltration of several organs indicated the development of autoimmunity, though symptoms were mild and quality of life for Aire-deficient mice appeared equivalent to wild-type littermates, with the exception of male infertility. Vbeta and CDR3 length analysis suggested that each Aire-deficient mouse developed it own polyclonal autoimmune repertoire. Finally, given the prevalence of candidiasis in APECED patients, we examined the control of infection with Candida albicans in Aire-deficient mice. No increase in disease susceptibility was found for either oral or systematic infection. These observations support the view that additional genetic and/or environmental factors contribute substantially to the overt nature of autoimmunity associated with Aire mutations, even for mutations identical to those found in humans with APECED. Keywords: Gene expression comparison between genotypes

DESIGN
In this experiment there are 5 samples altogether which consist of two biological replicates of Aire knock-out mTECs and 3 biological replicates of wild type mTECs.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19265170

