TITLE
LNCaP cells treated with chemoprevetive agents

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
BACKGROUND. Prostate cancer is thought to arise as a result of oxidative stresses and induction of antioxidant electrophile defense (phase 2) enzymes has been proposed as a prostate cancer prevention strategy. The isothiocyanate sulforaphane, derived from cruciferous vegetables like broccoli, potently induces surrogate markers of phase 2 enzyme activity in prostate cells in vitro and in vivo. To better understand the temporal effects of sulforaphane and broccoli sprouts on gene expression in prostate cells, we carried out comprehensive transcriptome analysis using cDNA microarrays. METHODS. Transcripts significantly modulated by sulforaphane over time were identified using StepMiner analysis. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was used to identify biological pathways, networks, and functions significantly altered by sulforaphane treatment. . StepMiner and IPA revealed significant changes in many transcripts associated with cell growth and cell cycle, as well as a significant number associated with cellular response to oxidative damage and stress. Comparison to an existing dataset suggested that sulforaphane blocked cell growth by inducing G2/M arrest. Cell growth assays and flow cytometry analysis confirmed that sulforaphane inhibited cell growth and induced cell cycle arrest. CONCLUSIONS. Our data suggest that in prostate cells sulforaphane primarily induces cellular defenses and inhibits cell growth by causingG2/Mphase arrest. Furthermore, based on the striking similarities in the gene expression patterns induced across experiments in these cells, sulforaphane appears to be the primary bioactive compound present in broccoli sprouts, suggesting that broccoli sprouts can serve as a suitable source for sulforaphane in intervention trials. A compound treatment design type is where the response to administration of a compound or chemical (including biological compounds such as hormones) is assayed. Time: length of treatment Compound Based Treatment: LNCaP cells were treated with 10 or 25 uM L-sulforaphane, broccoli extract or DMSO Keywords: compound_treatment_design

DESIGN
Computed

PLATFORM
GPL8046 SMD Human Print_633 GPL8047 SMD Human Print_654 GPL8048 SMD Human Print_673 GPL8049 SMD Human Print_731 GPL8050 SMD Human Print_886 GPL8051 SMD human Print_950

CITATIONS
18973173

