TITLE
Gene expression in mouse embyonic cardiomyocytes, fibroblasts and adult cardiac fibroblasts

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Growth and expansion of ventricular chambers is essential during cardiogenesis and is achieved by proliferation of cardiac progenitors that are not fully differentiated. Disruption of this process can lead to prenatal lethality. In contrast, adult cardiomyocytes achieve growth through hypertrophy rather than hyperplasia. Although epicardial-derived signals may contribute to the proliferative process in myocytes, the factors and cell types responsible for development of the ventricular myocardial thickness are unclear. Moreover, the function of embryonic cardiac fibroblasts, derived from epicardium, and their secreted factors are largely unknown. Using a novel co-culture system, we found that embryonic cardiac fibroblasts induced proliferation of cardiomyocytes, in contrast to adult cardiac fibroblasts that promoted myocyte hypertrophy. We identified fibronectin, collagen and heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor as embryonic cardiac fibroblast-specific signals that collaboratively promoted cardiomyocyte proliferation in a paracrine fashion. b1 integrin was required for this proliferative response, and ventricular cardiomyocyte-specific deletion of b1 integrin in mice resulted in reduced myocardial proliferation and impaired ventricular compaction. These findings reveal a previously unrecognized paracrine function of embryonic cardiac fibroblasts in regulating cardiomyocyte proliferation.

DESIGN
To identify candidate fibroblast-derived factors that promote myocyte proliferation, we isolated RNA from Nkx-YFP+ cardiomyocytes, embryonic cardiac fibroblasts, and adult cardiac fibroblasts and profiled mRNA expressions by microarray analyses. Arrays were performed using Affymetrix mouse Gene 1.0 ST arrays. Analysis was performed on three biological replicates of mouse embyonic cardiomyocytes, fibroblasts and adult cardiac fibroblasts.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
19217425

