TITLE
Global gene expression of Arabidopsis lines with altered ANAC102 expression under normal and low oxygen conditions

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Global gene expression was compared between Arabidopsis lines with altered expression of ANAC102 (over-expressed and knocked-out) and wild-type. ANAC102 is a putative NAC domain transcription factor. Gene expression was compared between an ANAC102 over-expressing line and parental ecotype C24 under ambient atmosphere to determine which genes ANAC102 is capable of regulating. Gene expression was also compared between three week old plants of an ANAC102 knock-out line and parental ecotype Col-0 under 0.1% Oxygen and ambient atmosphere conditions to determine which genes may require ANAC102 for appropriate expression under these conditions. Gene expression was also compared between imbibed seeds of an ANAC102 knock-out line and parental ecotype Col-0 following a 0.1% Oxygen treatment. Keywords: Genetic modification

DESIGN
Three related experiments were performed. In the first two, three week old Arabidopsis seedlings (4-6 leaves) were used. In the first experiment one line of ANAC102 over-expressing plants were compared to ecotype C24 (the parental line used in the creation of the ANAC102 over-expressing line). Two biological replicates were used for each line and for each biological replicate, five Arabidopsis seedlings grown on the same petri dish were bulked. RNA was extracted from whole plants. In the second experiment, one line of plants bearing a T-DNA insertion in the second exon of the ANAC102 gene was compared to ecotype Col-0 (the parental line used for the T-DNA mutagenesis) both without treatment and following treatment with 0.1% Oxygen for four hours. Two biological replicates were used for each line and for each biological replicate, five Arabidopsis seedlings grown on the same petri dish were bulked. RNA was extracted from root tissue only. In the third experiment imbibed seeds of one Arabiopsis line bearing a T-DNA insertion in the second exon of the ANAC102 gene was compared to seeds of ecotype Col-0 (the parental line used for the T-DNA mutagenesis) following treatment with 0.1% Oxygen for six days. Three biological replicates were used for each line and for each biological replicate, ~5mg (pre-imbibition) of seed were bulked. RNA was extracted from whole seed.

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
19176720

