TITLE
The effect of TIM-3 stimulation on the gene expression profile of IgE/antigen-activated mouse mast cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
TIM-3 is known to be expressed on dendritic cells, monocytes, melanoma cells, mast cells and on activated Th1 cells. In activated Th1 cells, stimulating TIM-3 by one of its ligands, galectin-9, leads to apoptosis and thus it plays a central role in terminating Th1-type immune responses. Interestingly, in IgE/antigen-activated mast cells TIM-3 enhances the production of IL-13 and IL-4. To get a more complete picture about the gene expression changes induced by TIM-3 in mast cells, in vitro differentiated mouse immature mast cells were stimulated by an agonist anti-TIM-3 antibody and IgE-sensitized mouse immature mast cells were activated by antigen and an agonist anti-TIM-3 antibody for 2 or 16 hours (overnight).

DESIGN
Bone marrow cells were differentiated in RPMI + 10% FCS + 5 ng/ml mouse IL-3 + 40 ng/ml mouse SCF for > 4 weeks. The purity of the cell cultures was > 90% at this time point (FcERIa+/c-kit+ cells). These in vitro-differentiated immature mast cells were then treated by either control goat IgG or an agonist anti-mouse TIM-3 antibody (RnD Systems, 15 ug/ml for 2 or 16 hours). For the IgE/antigen-activated mouse mast cells, these in vitro-differentiated immature mast cells were sensitized by 5 ug/ml anti-DNP IgE (Sigma) for 1 hour and then treated with 100 ng/ml DNP-HSA (antigen, Sigma) and either control goat IgG or an agonist anti-mouse TIM-3 antibody (RnD Systems, 15 ug/ml) for 2 or 16 hours. The anti-TIM-3 samples were labeled by Cy5 and they were compared to the Cy3-labeled, goat IgG controls in a dual-color, paired experimental setup. The Agilent Whole Mouse Genome 4x44K expression microarray kit and Dual-Color Protocol version 5.5 were used in the experiments.

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

