TITLE
Simvastatin attenuates lung vascular leak and inflammation in a murine model of radiation-induced lung injury

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background: Microvascular injury and increased vascular leakage are prominent features of the radiation-induced lung injury (RILI) which follows cancer–associated thoracic irradiation. The mechanisms of RILI are incompletely understood and therapeutic strategies to limit RILI are currently unavailable. We established a murine model of radiation pneumonitis in order to assess mechanism-based therapies for RILI-induced inflammation and vascular barrier dysfunction. Based on prior studies, we investigated the therapeutic potential of simvastatin as a vascular barrier protective agent in RILI. Methods: C57BL6/J mice receiving single dose exposure to 18, 20, 22, or 25 Gy, (n=10/group) were temporally assessed (4-12 weeks) for cellular and biochemical indices of injury present in both bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and lung tissues (cytokines, tyrosine nitrosylated proteins, leukocytes, extravasation of Evans blue dye or EBD, BAL albumin, histology). In specific experiments, irradiated mice (25Gy) received simvastatin (10 mg/kg) via intraperitoneal injection three times a week (pre and post irradiation) for 2- 6 weeks post irradiation. Results. Acute RILI evolved in a dose- and time-dependent fashion. Mice irradiated with 25Gy exhibited modest increases in BAL leukocytes but significant increases in BAL IL-6 (p=0.03) and TNF-a (p=0.01) at 4 weeks compared to controls. Increases in BAL nitrotyrosine content peaked at 6 weeks (p=0.03) and was accompanied by marked nitrotyrosine immunostaining in lung tissues. Indices of increase lung vascular permeability such as EBD extravasation, BAL protein and BAL albumin significantly increased over time beginning at 6 weeks (p > 0.002 all) with histological evidence of severe edema formation and airway inflammation. Simvastatin- treated irradiated mice were noted to exhibit marked attenuation of vascular leak with significantly decreased BAL protein (p=0.01) and inflammatory cell infiltration (50% reduction). Conclusion: Simvastatin is a potentially important therapeutic strategy to limit RILI and may influence radiation associated morbidity and mortality. We used microarrays to detail the global programme of gene expression induced by radiation in Wild type and the protection of SIMVA

DESIGN
animals were treated by Vehical, Radiation (25Gy), SIMVA(10mg/kg), or both.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
20508068

