TITLE
Genomic distribution of CHD7 on chromatin tracks H3K4 methylation patterns

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens ; Mus musculus

SUMMARY
CHD7 is a member of the chromodomain helicase DNA binding domain family of ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling enzymes.  De novo mutation of the CHD7 gene is a major cause of CHARGE syndrome, a genetic disease characterized by a complex constellation of birth defects.  To gain insight to the function of CHD7, we mapped the distribution of the CHD7 protein on chromatin using the approach of chromatin immunoprecipitation on tiled microarrays (ChIP-chip).  These studies were performed in human colorectal carcinoma cells, human neuroblastoma cells, and mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells before and after differentiation into neural precursor cells. The results indicate that CHD7 localizes to discrete locations along chromatin that are specific to each cell type, and that the cell-specific binding of CHD7 correlates with a subset of histone H3 methylated at lysine 4 (H3K4me). The CHD7 sites change concomitantly with H3K4me patterns during ES cell differentiation, suggesting that H3K4me is part of the epigenetic signature that defines lineage-specific association of CHD7 with specific sites on chromatin.  Furthermore, the CHD7 sites are predominantly located distal to transcription start sites, most often contained within DNase hypersensitive sites, frequently conserved, and near genes expressed at relatively high levels.  These features are similar to those of gene enhancer elements, raising the possibility that CHD7 functions in enhancer mediated transcription, and that the congenital anomalies in CHARGE syndrome are due to alterations in transcription of tissue-specific genes normally regulated by CHD7 during development.

DESIGN
ChIP-chip experiments were performed for CHD7 and H3K4 mono-,di-, and trimethylation modifications in 4 cells types: human DLD1 and SH-SY5Y; mouse ES and differentiated neural precursor cells derived from mouse ES cells.  Microarrays used in these experiments tiled all or subset of ENCODE regions (in mouse, analogous ENCODE regions were assayed).  At least two biological replicates were performed for each CHD7 ChIP experiment; H3K4 ChIP's were performed once in each cell type.

PLATFORM
GPL7513 NimbleGen human (hg17) ENCODE tiling array GPL7521 NimbleGen mouse mm7 ENCODE tiling array (385k) GPL8045 Nimblegen ENCODE HG18 385K GPL8082 Agilent_ENCODE_44K_HG18_custom

CITATIONS
19251738

