TITLE
Immunopurified mRNA-ribosome complexes expose cell-type specific plasticity in response to hypoxia in Arabidopsis

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Plant organs are comprised of distinct cell types with unique assemblages of mRNAs. This is a collection of CEL files of mRNA profiles of the total steady-state mRNAs and polysomal mRNAs of distinct cell types of the whole root and shoot of 7-d-old Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings. The cell type specific mRNA populations are those present in ribosome-mRNA complexes. This sub-population of mRNAs was obtained by first establishing a collection of Arabidopsis lines that express a FLAG-epitope tagged ribosomal protein L18 (RPL18) directed by promoters expressed in specific cell types and regions. Thirteen different promoter:FLAG-RPL18 lines were used. The targeted cell types and promoters included root atrichoblast (non-hair) epidermal cells (pGL2), root endodermis (pSCR), root stelar xylem and pericycle (pWOL, pSHR), root phloem companion cells (phloem CC) (pSUC2, pSultr2;2), root proliferating cells (pRPL11C), root cortex meristematic cells (pCO2), root cortex elongation/maturation cells (pPEP), shoot mesophyll (pRBCS), shoot epidermis (pCER5), shoot guard cells (pKAT1), shoot bundle sheath (pSultr2;2), shoot phloem CC (pSUC2) and shoot trichomes (pGL2). A CaMV 35S promoter:FLAG-RPL18 line was used to obtain the polysomal mRNA of multiple cell types. The immunopurification of ribosome-mRNA complexes of specific cell types/regions was accomplished by the method described in Zanetti et al. (Plant Physiology, 138, 624-635; 2005). Hybridization of the immunopurified mRNAs to the Affymetrix ATH1 DNA microarray platform and subsequent data analysis permitted the identification of transcripts that are enriched or depleted in specific cell types/regions of roots and shoots. The dataset includes samples from cell types/regions from seedlings grown under control conditions and cell types/regions of seedlings exposed to low oxygen stress (hypoxia) for 2 h. Keywords: cell-type specific expression, hypoxic stress, polysomal mRNA, abiotic stress, atrichoblasts, epidermis, cortex, endodermis, stele, phloem companion cells, guard cells, mesophyll

