TITLE
Identifying the genes involved in CD4+ T cell mediated-acute allograft rejection

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Acute allograft rejection is a leading cause for the failure of organ allotransplantation. Identifying the genes involved in the rejection process provides clues to study the mechanisms, and to provide specific gene targets for monitoring, predicting and preventing acute allograft rejection. Using a mice model of skin acute allograft rejection and SAGE method, we analyzed gene expression in the CD4+ T cells of the mice, the cell type known to play critical roles in acute allograft rejection. Our study identifies 402 SAGE tags significantly different from these from the control. From these SAGE tags, we identified 91 increasingly and 85 decreasingly expressed genes, and many genes have not been linked with acute allograft rejection before. Functional classification of these genes shows that apoptosis, transcription regulation, cell growth and maintenance and signal transduction are among the most frequently changed functional groups. Our study provides a genome-wide view for the genes involving acute allograft rejection in the CD4+ T cells, and indicates that acute allograft rejection involves multiple genes in different functional categories. The genes identified from the study provide candidates for further studying the mechanisms and for monitoring, predicting and preventing acute allograft rejection.

DESIGN
Female mice of 6-10 week age were used for the study. BALB/c mice (H-2d) and BALB/c severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice were from the animal facility of Shandong University (Jinan, China). C57BL/6 (H-2b, B6) were from Vitalriveri Co. ltd (Beijing, China). Mice were maintained in a pathogen-free animal environment during the experimental process. The use of mice for the study was approved by the Institutional Animal Experimental Committee, and animal care and surgical procedures were performed in compliance with the standard animal experimental protocols of Shandong University School of Medicine. The process of generating skin acute allograft rejection followed the established procedure (12). Briefly, dorsal skin of C57BL/6 was transplanted onto the dorsal thorax of BALB/c SCID mice under sterile condition (allotransplant). As a control, dorsal skin of BALB/c mice was transplanted to BALB/c SCID mice (autotransplant). After 28 days of transplantation, CD4+ T cells were harvested from the spleens of BALB/c mice by using the mouse CD4+ T cells enrichment columns (R & D) with the purity > 90% as measured by flow cytometry and 8x106 purified CD4+ T cells were adoptively injected into each transplanted mice via the lateral tail vein. The skin graft in each transplanted mice was then monitored daily. The skin graft was considered to fully reject when more than 50% of the skin became necrosis. SAGE Analysis Upon 14 days post CD4+ T cell transferring, CD4+ T cells were collected from the spleens of five mice in each group with adaptive CD4 T cell transferring using the same process described above. Total RNA was extracted from the purified cells by using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) and mRNA was purified from the total RNA using oligo dT beads (Invitrogen). cDNA was synthesized by using MMLV reverse transcriptase and oligo(dT) primers (MBI-add full name). SAGE libraries from 4 allotransplant and autotransplant groups were constructed following the standard procedure (13). For each SAGE library, 1,200 sequences were collected through an ABI 3730 DNA sequencer (Applied BioSystems). SAGE tags were extracted from the sequences by using the SAGE2000 software (Invitrogen).

PLATFORM
GPL11 SAGE:10:NlaIII:Mus musculus

CITATIONS
21294963

