TITLE
Gene expression profiling in liver of mice with a mutant Wrn protein treated with/without vitamin C compared to WT mice.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Werner syndrome (WS) is a rare disorder characterized by the premature onset of a number of age-related diseases. The gene responsible for WS is believed to be involved in different aspects of transcription, replication, and/or DNA repair. We generated a mouse model with a deletion in the helicase domain of the murine WRN homologue that recapitulates most of the WS phenotypes including an abnormal hyaluronic acid excretion, higher reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels, increased genomic instability and cancer incidence resulting in a 10-15% decreased life span expectancy. In addition, WS patients and Wrn mutant mice show hallmarks of a metabolic syndrome including premature visceral obesity, hypertriglyceridemia, insulin-resistant diabetes type 2 and associated cardiovascular diseases. In this study, we compared the expression profile of liver tissues from 9 months old Wrn mutant and wild type animals. Gene set enrichment analysis of the microarray data indicated that Wrn mutant mice exhibited down-regulation of genes normally decreased in several transgenic mouse models of hepatoma and during caloric restriction. Wrn mutant mice also altered the expression of genes involved in inflammation as well as in glutathione and xenobiotic metabolisms. These results indicate that Wrn mutant mice respond to the observed oxidative stress by altering the necessary pathways to survive. Vitamin C supplementation rescued the life span expectancy of Wrn mutant mice and reversed several age-related abnormalities in adipose, cardiac, and liver tissues, genomic integrity and inflammatory status. Finally, gene set enrichment analyses revealed that vitamin C decreased genes normally up regulated in human WS fibroblasts and cancers and it increased genes involved in tissue injury response and adipocyte dedifferentiation in obese mice.

DESIGN
Microarray analyses were performed on the liver tissues of 9 months old mice. Four independent biological replicates of this experiment (wild type vs Wrn mutant or wild type vs vitamin C treated mutant mice) were carried out with a dye swap on two replicates of each genotype.

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
19741171 , 20974729

