TITLE
Indices of Tolerance (IOT): Cross-platform biomarkers that identify kidney transplant tolerance

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Being able to identify patients in whom immunological tolerance has been established or is developing would allow an individually tailored approach to post-transplant management of kidney allograft recipients. Ex vivo immunological monitoring was performed on samples from five groups of European renal transplant recipients (“IOT samples”): ten drug-free tolerant recipients who were functionally stable despite remaining immunosuppression-free for more than one year (Tol-DF); also functionally stable patients on minimal immunosuppression ( < 10 mg/day prednisone, s-LP); stable patients maintained with calcineurin inhibitors (s-CNI); stable patients maintained on CNI-free immunosuppression regimen (s-nCNI); patients showing signs of chronic rejection (CR) and healthy controls (HC). Among the investigation of other biomarkers and bioassays, gene expression profiles were generated on custom Agilent 8x15K 60mer oligonucleotide microarrays (“RISET 2.0”) on the IOT cohort (training set) and on an independent cohort of patients from the ITN (USA) that contained similar groups of patients and included 23 tolerant recipients (“ITN samples”, test set). Set of genes were identified, whose expression on whole blood allowed the identification of 100% of the tolerant recipients in the training set and 84% in the test set. Keywords: classification of clinical samples, tolerance prediction

DESIGN
IOT samples: 13 samples from 10 Tol-DF patients, 16 samples from 11 s-LP patients, 8 samples from 8 s-nCNI patients, 40 samples from 28 s-CNI patients, 10 samples from 9 CR patients, and 8 samples from 8 HC donors were analysed on a custom Agilent 8x15K 60mer oligonucleotide microarray encomprising 5069 probes in triplicates. The microarray is dedicated to transplantation research and was designed based on current literature and published and unpublished data provided by the RISET consortium. For the probe selection procedure we specially focused on the detection of multiple transcript variants of a gene, on optimized hybridization properties of the probes, and on the avoidance of crosshybridization. The sampling dates of replicate samples from the same patient range from one day to 1.5 years. ITN samples: 31 samples from 23 Tol-DF patients, 14 samples from 11 s-LP patients, 52 samples from 34 s-CNI patients, 25 samples from 18 CR patients, and 20 samples from 20 HC donors were analysed on the same microarray platform and served as test set. The samples of the two cohorts differ in the protocol of RNA preparation.

PLATFORM
GPL8136 Agilent RISET 2.0 8x15K 60mer oligonucleotide microarray

CITATIONS
20501943

