TITLE
Identification of Hedgehog Signaling and Novel Transcription Factors Involved in Regulation of Systemic Response to LPS

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background: Our understanding of the role host genetic factors play in the initiation and severity of infections caused by Gram negative bacteria is incomplete. Methods: To identify novel regulators of the host response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 11 inbred murine strains were challenged with LPS systemically.  RNA from lung, liver, and spleen tissue was profiled on oligonucleotide microarrays to determine if unique transcripts differentiate susceptible and resistant strains of mice.  Gene expression data were analyzed to identify over-represented pathways and transcription factors (TFs).  The role of several TFs in innate immune response to LPS was examined by RNA interference in a mouse macrophage cell line.  Mouse lines with targeted mutations were utilized to further confirm involvement of two novel genes in innate immunity. Results: In addition to two strains lacking functional TLR4 (C3H/HeJ and C57BL/6JTLR4-/-), three murine strains with functional TLR4 (C57BL/6, 129/SvlmJ, and NZW/LacJ) were found to be resistant to systemic LPS challenge; the other six strains were classified as sensitive.  Gene expression analysis supports the involvement of a number of previously identified genes, molecular pathways, and TFs in the host response to LPS but also identifies Hedgehog signaling as a novel pathway activated by LPS.  B6;129Ptch1+/+ wild-type mice were shown to be more sensitive to systemic LPS than B6;129Ptch1+/- heterozygote littermates further supporting the role of Hedgehog signaling in systemic LPS response.  RNA interference-mediated inhibition of 6 TFs (C/EBP, Cdx-2, E2F1, Hoxa4, Nhlh1, and Tead2), out of 15 tested, was found to diminish production of IL-6 and TNFalpha protein in murine macrophages.  The role of E2F1 was confirmed by showing that B6;129E2F1-/- knockout mice are more sensitive to systemic LPS than wild-type controls. Conclusions: Our analysis of gene expression data identified novel pathways and transcription factors that regulate the host response to systemic LPS.  Our results provide potential sepsis biomarkers and therapeutic targets that should be further investigated in human populations. Keywords: disease state analysis

DESIGN
For each strain of mice, 6 mice were treated with LPS and 6 with saline.  RNA of 3 animals was pooled to make two pools per condition (two biological replicates).  Each pool was labeled with Cy3 and Cy5 and co-hybridized with Stratagene Univeral Mouse Reference (dye flip techical replicates). RNA from lung, liver, and spleen tissue was profiled on oligonucleotide microarrays

PLATFORM
GPL6466 Agilent-011978 Mouse Microarray G4121A (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
21131441

