TITLE
microRNA-125b Promotes Neuronal Differentiation in Human Cells by Repressing Multiple Targets

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
We report here the expression profile of microRNAs in human neuronal differentiation in the neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y. Six microRNAs were significantly upregulated during differentiation induced by all-trans¬-retinoic acid and brain-derived neurotrophic factor. We demonstrated that ectopic expression of either miR-124a or miR-125b increases the percentage of differentiated SH-SY5Y cells with neurite outgrowth. Subsequently, we focused our functional analysis on miR-125b and demonstrated the important role of this miRNA in both spontaneous and induced differentiation of SH-SH5Y cells, based on neurite outgrowth and neuronal marker expression. In human neural progenitor ReNcell VM cells, miR-125b is also upregulated during differentiation and miR-125b ectopic expression significantly promotes neurite outgrowth. To identify the targets of miR-125b regulation, we profiled the global changes in gene expression following miR-125b ectopic expression in SH-SY5Y cells. miR-125b represses 164 genes that contain the seed match sequence of the microRNA and/or predicted to be direct targets of miR-125b by conventional methods. Pathway analysis suggests that a subset of miR-125b-repressed targets antagonize neuronal genes in several neurogenic pathways, thereby mediating the positive effect of miR-125b on neuronal differentiation. We have further validated the binding of miR-125b to the microRNA response elements of ten selected targets. Together, we report here for the first time the important role of miR-125b in human neuronal differentiation. Keywords: mir125-OE/mir-scrambled control  comparison & mir125-KD/mir-scrambled control comparsion

DESIGN
In this study we sought to understand the role of miRNAs in differentiation of human neural cells using simple in vitro models, human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells and human neural progenitor ReNcell VM cells. When sequentially treated with all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), SH-SY5Y cells give rise to fully differentiated neuron-like cells (8). These differentiated SH-SY5Y cells are withdrawn from the cell cycle, express various neuronal markers, and exhibit carbachol-evoked noradrenaline release (8). Moreover, as no glial cell is derived by this process, it is a robust and homogenous model system for investigating neuronal differentiation (8). Using microarrays and Northern blots, we identified a group of miRNAs that are significantly upregulated in differentiated SH-SY5Y cells. We further showed that one of these miRNAs, miR-125b, significantly enhances differentiation and neuronal morphogenesis of SH-SY5Y cells. In addition, this miRNA also promotes neurite outgrowth in human neural progenitor ReNcell VM cells.

PLATFORM
GPL5104 Sentrix HumanRef-8 v2 Expression BeadChip

CITATIONS
19635812

