TITLE
Positioning of Necrotic Lobular Intraepithelial Neoplasias within the sequence of breast carcinoma progression

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Lobular intraepithelial neoplasia grade 3 (LIN) is a recently recognized variant of intraepithelial lobular neoplasia of the breast composed of either uniform, generally small, cells (classic) with massive lobular distension, pleomorphic cells, signet-ring cells, or any cell type with necrosis.  In contrast to classic forms of LIN, there is no consensus on therapeutic strategies for LIN3. In part this is due to the paucity of molecular data that could assist in defining the relationship of LIN3 to classic LIN and carcinomas. In this study we have employed array CGH to determine the patterns of chromosomal aberrations in 9 LIN3 lesions. By comparison to array CGH data of 13 classic LIN lesions, we demonstrate that LIN and LIN3 share several recurrent changes, in particular gains of 1q and losses of 16q. Both aberrations are known to appear early in tumorigenesis and to be associated with good prognosis. However, apart from this overlap, there were a number of karyotypic features that were observed exclusively in LIN3. Clearly, this lesion was characterized by a significantly higher number of DNA copy number changes (9 vs. 31 on average), a considerable complexity of chromosomal rearrangements with up to 16 breakpoints in one chromosome and overlapping high copy amplifications. The amplicons encompassed a number of known oncogenes such as ERBB2, CyclinD1 and FGF3 that have already been reported to be overexpressed in breast carcinomas. Our data suggest that, at the genetic level, LIN3 represents a highly advanced lesion with considerable resemblance to carcinomas and, therefore, reflects a lesion on the verge of invasion, and might represent the transition state from an intraepithelial neoplasm  to breast carcinoma.

DESIGN
In this study, nine cases of pleomorphic/necrotic LIN lesions as well as one classic LIN and the concurrent invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) were analyzed by array CGH. Sections of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens cut at 7-8µm were mounted on special foil-coated slides (Molecular Devices, San Diego, USA). The sections were then deparaffinized with Xylene, processed in decreasing concentrations of ethanol and stained with haematoxylin. Lasercapture microdissection for both lesions was performed at multiple sites using Veritas Arcturus. For reference-DNA, female mammary tissue without histomorphological changes obtained from reduction mammoplasty specimens was procecessed and laser-microdissected as explained above. Cells were digested in 10µl TE, pH 9, and 0.5µl proteinase K (20mg/ml) for 48h at 55°C. After inactivation of proteinase K at 99°C for 10min, the digest was stored at -20°C.  Without any further purification, the complete digest was used for whole genome amplification by means of the WGA (Whole Genome Amplification) kit from Sigma following the manufacturer’s recommendations. Array CGH was performed as described previously. In brief, two µg of amplified tumor and reference DNA were labelled by random priming (BioPrime® Total Genomic Labeling System, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) with Alexa Fluor® 3 and Alexa Fluor® 5, respectively, and hybridized onto a tiling path BAC array, consisting of the human 32k BAC Re-Array Set (BACPAC Resources Center; http://bacpac.chori.org/pHumanMinSet.htm; DNA kindly provided by Pieter de Jong) and a 1Mb Resolution BAC set (clones kindly provided by Nigel Carter, Wellcome Trust Sanger Centre). All protocols are provided in detail on our website ( http://www.molgen.mpg.de/~abt_rop/molecular_cytogenetics/ ) and more information concerning this platform have been submitted to the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/; GLP: 5114). For the analysis and visualization of array CGH data, our software-package CGH-PRO was employed. No background subtraction was applied. Raw data were normalized by “Subgrid LOWESS”. For the assessment of copy number gains and losses, we used circular binary segmentation in combination with log2 ratio thresholds of 0.15 and -0.15, respectively. High copy amplifications were defined by focal appearance and a log2 ratio exceeding 0.45. In order to statistically investigate the similarity of aberration profiles we applied Pearson's product-moment correlation to cbs ratios of each of the corresponding arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL5114 MPIMG Homo sapiens 36k_arrayCGH8

CITATIONS
20155841

