TITLE
Differences in gene expression in islets isolated from pancreata donated after Cardiac Death relative to Brain Death

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The decreasing numbers of Donation after Brain Death (DBD) donors necessitates the comprehensive evaluation of Donation after Cardiac Death Donors (DCD) as a source of pancreata.  The aim of this study was to characterize pancreata and islets from DCD and DBD donors with respect to markers of cellular stress that may indicate compromised islet quality.   Immunohistochemical staining of pre-isolation pancreas biopsies found increased numbers of caspase 3 positive islets in DBD, while markers of oxidative stress (nitrotyrosine, CML, and HNE) were elevated in DCD.  Assessment of islet quality by standard (yield, morphology, fluorescence microscopy, and glucose stimulated insulin secretion) and novel methods (flow cytometry, HPLC quantification of ATP) did not reveal significant differences.  However, the post culture loss of DCD islets was increased compared to DBD, and DCD islets showed delayed functional potency when transplanted into diabetic NOD.scid mice.  Microarray analysis of cultured islets showed increased expression of multiple stress pathway related genes in DCD compared to DBD.  Together these data indicate that the current standard donor management, pancreas recovery and preservation practices are insufficient to quench the oxidative stress injury suffered by DCD islets which leads to loss in culture and may complicate their use in clinical transplant. Keywords: cell type comparison

DESIGN
In the study presented here, 10 islet preparations isolated from Donation after Brain Death pancreata were compared to 9 sets of islet preparations isolated from Donation after Cardiac Death pancreata.  All islet preparations had cold ischemia times less than 11 hours.

PLATFORM
GPL4133 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

