TITLE
Small fish comp tox ZF haloperidol 96 h ovary

ORGANISM
Danio rerio

SUMMARY
This experiment was conducted as part of an overall study aimed at examining effects of a dopamine receptor antagonist on reproduction, behavior, and gene expression in cyprinid fish.  Relative to gene expression, we hypothesized that if haloperidol disrupted normal regulation of the HPG axis, there may be robust transcriptional alterations in the ovary of exposed females that might serve as useful markers of exposure and/or effects. For the purposes of this study, robust transcriptional alterations were defined as those detected in two separate fish species (fathead minnow and zebrafish), exposed to the same concentration of haloperidol for the same duration.  There is a companion fathead minnow microarray experiment (GSE15115) that these data are compared to.  Transcriptional responses in the ovary of the two species are compared in terms of differentially expressed genes, enriched gene ontology categories they represent, and associated pathways.

DESIGN
Fathead minnow and zebrafish microarray experiment Samples for microarray analysis were generated in a separate, 96 h, continuous flow-through experiment. Nominal treatment concentrations for the microarray experiment were 0 and 50 μg haloperidol/L. Chemical (or control water) delivery was initiated 24 h prior to adding fish to the tanks. To start the experiment, fathead minnows (4 males, 4 females per tank) were added to each of three tanks per treatment group, while zebrafish (6 males, 6 females per tank) were added to each of two tanks per group. The time of fish addition was staggered by replicate within each treatment such that all samples from a given exposure tank could be collected within 60 min of the intended 96 h exposure duration. After 96 h, male and female zebrafish and female fathead minnows were anesthetized in buffered MS-222 and weighed. Whole gonads were removed, weighed, and preserved in RNAlater. Aliquots of six ovary RNA samples per treatment group, generally those with greater RIN and three from each replicate tank, were submitted to an Agilent certified facility, MOgene, LC (St. Louis, MO, USA) for microarray analysis, along with a reference pool of RNA prepared from adult male and female zebrafish liver, brain, and gonad tissues (Martinovic et al. 2009).

PLATFORM
GPL6563 Agilent-015064 D. rerio (Zebrafish) Oligo Microarray 4x44K G2519F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
19896709

