TITLE
Comparison of 2 aspen genotypes having similar carbon assimilation rates but different allocation patterns under elevated CO2

ORGANISM
Populus tremuloides

SUMMARY
• Reference to published study making use of this data:  • Cseke LJ, Tsai C-J, Rogers A, Nelsen MP, White HL, Karnosky DF, Podila GK. (2009) Transcriptomic comparison in the leaves of two aspen genotypes having similar carbon assimilation rates but different allocation patterns under elevated CO2. New Phytologist. submitted. • This study compared the leaf transcription profiles, physiological characteristics, and primary metabolites of two Populus tremuloides genotypes (clones 216 and 271) known to differ in their responses to long-term elevated [CO2] (e[CO2]) at the Aspen FACE site near Rhinelander, WI.  • Physiological responses of these clones are similar in photosynthesis, stomatal conductance, and leaf area index under e[CO2] yet very different in growth enhancement (0-10% in clone 216; 40-50% in clone 271). While few genes responded to long-term exposure to e[CO2], the transcriptional activity of leaf e[CO2]-responsive genes was distinctly different between the clones, differentially impacting multiple pathways during both early and late growing seasons.   • Analysis of transcript abundance and carbon/nitrogen biochemistry suggests that the CO2-responsive clone (271) partitions C into pathways associated with active defense/response to stress, carbohydrate/starch biosynthesis and subsequent growth. The CO2-unresponsive clone (216) partitions C into pathways associated with passive defense (e.g. lignin, phenylpropanoid) and cell wall thickening.   • This study indicates that there is significant variation in expression patterns between different tree genotypes in response to long-term exposure to e[CO2]. Consequently, future efforts to improve productivity or other advantageous traits for carbon sequestration should include an examination of genetic variability in CO2 responsiveness. Keywords: Tree genotype comparison under elevated [CO2]

DESIGN
24 two-channel arrays, directly comparing RNA from trees grown in the ambient (control) [CO2] to RNA derived from the same genotype grown under e[CO2].  For each of 4 experimental conditions (clone 216 early season; clone 271 early season; clone 216 late season; clone 271 late season), three independent biological replicates derived from trees grown in three independent replicate FACE rings were used.  In addition, each clone and time point included dye swap reciprocal two-color experiments for each biological replicate. Thus, six data points per cDNA are included (three biological replicates with two technical replicates each).

PLATFORM
GPL6036 PICME Poplar 28K 4_1/4_3

CITATIONS
19383098

