TITLE
Characterisation of LAP/LIP transcriptional signature in human hepatoma cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
BACKGROUND & AIMS: C/EBPbeta is involved in numerous process as carcinogenesis but its role is still not clear due to the existence of an active form (LAP) and an inhibitory form (LIP) of this transcription factor. The main goals of the present research were (i) the identification of genes inversely regulated by LAP and LIP i-e the genuine C/EBPbeta molecular signature in the Hep3B human hepatoma cell line (ii) a better understanding of LAP and LIP respective role in hepatic cells survival and proliferation (iii) the search of the C/EBPbeta signature among hepatocellular carcinomas.  METHODS: Using Tet-off expression system we engineered Hep3BLAP and Hep3BLIP cells, in which LAP and LIP were over-expressed respectively. Then, using both expression profiling (DNA arrays) and ChIP-on-chip analysis, we identified genes inversely and/or directly regulated by each of the C/EBPbeta isoforms. The expression levels of these genes regulated by LAP/LIP were compared in controls and HCCs patients.   RESULTS: We identified 676 genes inversely regulated by LAP and LIP and among these, 45 are direct targets. Using functional studies, we displayed the opposite role of LAP and LIP in staurosporine-induced cell death and the implication of LAP in the repression of Hep3B cells proliferation. Finally we identified a subgroup of HCCs with a deregulation of 165 genes belonging to C/EBPbeta signature and coding for proteins involved in chemoresistance and metastasis formation.  CONCLUSIONS: Our study increases knowledge on LAP and LIP functions and provides first evidence that their molecular signature in the HCCs could predict tumor evolution.

DESIGN
Total genomic DNA were extracted from 3 Hep3BLAP expressing LAP and were labelled Cy3 fluorochrome. Genomic DNA were extracted from 3 Hep3BLAP expressing LAP, were immunoprecipited with anti-CEBPbeta antibody  and were labelled with Cy5 fluorochrome. Each sample was hybridized on an Agilent two-color microarray G4489A (Human Promoter ChIP-on-Chip Set 244K).

PLATFORM
GPL8167 Agilent Human Promoter ChIP-on-Chip Set 244K, combined Microarray (slides 1 and 2) HG17 build

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

