TITLE
Cdcs1 a major colitis susceptibility locus in mice; subcongenic analysis reveals genetic complexity

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background and Aims: In the interleukin-10-deficient (Il10-/-) mouse model of IBD, 10 quantitative trait loci (QTL) have been shown to be associated with colitis susceptibility by linkage analyses on experimental crosses of highly susceptible C3H/HeJBir (C3Bir)-Il10-/- and partially resistant C57BL/6J (B6)-Il10-/- mice. The strongest locus (C3Bir-derived cytokine deficiency-induced colitis susceptibility [Cdcs]1 on Chromosome [Chr] 3) controlled multiple colitogenic subphenotypes and contributed the vast majority to the phenotypic variance in cecum and colon. This was demonstrated by interval-specific Chr 3 congenic mice wherein defined regions of Cdcs1 from C3Bir or B6 were bred into the IL-10-deficient reciprocal background and altered the susceptible or resistant phenotype. Furthermore, this locus likely acts by inducing innate hypo- and adaptive hyperresponsiveness, associated with impaired NFΚB responses of macrophages. The aim of the present study was to dissect the complexity of Cdcs1 by further development and characterization of reciprocal Cdcs1 congenic strains and to identify potential candidate genes in the congenic interval. Material and Methods: In total, 15 reciprocal congenic strains were generated from Il10-/- mice of either C3H/HeJBir or C57BL/6J backgrounds by 10 cycles of backcrossing. Colitis activity was monitored by histological grading. Candidate genes were identified by fine mapping of congenic intervals, sequencing, microarray analysis and a high-throughput real-time RT-PCR approach using bone marrow-derived macrophages. Results: Within the originally identified Cdcs1-interval, three independent regions were detected that likely contain susceptibility-determining genetic factors (Cdcs1.1, Cdcs1.2, and Cdcs1.3). Combining results of candidate gene approaches revealed Fcgr1, Cnn3, Larp7, and Alpk1 as highly attractive candidate genes with polymorphisms in coding or regulatory regions and expression differences between susceptible and resistant mouse strains. Conclusions: Subcongenic analysis of the major susceptibility locus Cdcs1 on mouse chromosome 3 revealed a complex genetic structure. Candidate gene approaches revealed attractive genes within the identified regions with homologs that are located in human susceptibility regions for IBD.

DESIGN
Bone marrow derived macrophages (BMDM) of colitis susceptible C3Bir-Il10-/- and colitis resistant B6-Il10-/- as well as the Il10-/- reciprocal congenic strains CB-R1 (C3Bir genetic background carrying a long congenic chromosome 3 element containing Cdcs1 from B6, rendering this formerly susceptible background resistant) and BC-R3 (B6 genetic background that carries the Cdcs1-region of C3Bir) were cultured and stimulated with flagellin or left unstimulated.   BMDM were obtained from 3 male mice per genotype and cultured in polystyrene 6-well culture plates. Before RNA-isolation, 3 wells per plate were stimulated with Cbir1 flagellin (and subsequently pooled for RNA isolation), the other 3 wells left unstimulated (and also pooled). In total, these experiments were replicated three times in order to perform microarray analyses in triplicates.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19856416

