TITLE
MEF-mKras-WT1

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
K-ras is one of the most frequently mutated human oncogenes.  Activation of K-ras can lead to either senescence or proliferation in primary cells. The precise mechanism governing these distinct outcomes remains unclear. Here we utilized a loss-of-function screen to assess the role of specific genes identified as potential key regulators of K-ras driven oncogenesis. Using this approach, we identify the transcription factor Wt1 as an inhibitor of senescence in primary cells expressing oncogenic K-ras.  Deletion or suppression of Wt1 expression leads to senescence of primary cells expressing oncogenic K-ras under the control of the native promotor at physiological levels, but has no effect on cells expressing wild-type K-ras.  Wt1 contributes to K-ras driven lung tumorigenesis in vivo and loss of Wt1 is specifically deleterious to human lung cancer cell lines that are dependent on oncogenic K-ras.  Taken together, these observations reveal a novel role for Wt1 as a key regulator of the complex genetic network required for the oncogenic effect of the small GTPase K-ras. We compare the expression profiles of Wild type, K-ras mutant, Wt1-null, and double K-ras mutant/Wt1-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). The study provides insights into the transcriptional role of Wt1 in the context of oncogenic K-ras.

DESIGN
MEFs were infected with adenoviral Cre to activate K-ras (6 samples), knockout Wt1 (5 samples), both activate K-ras and knockout Wt1 (7 samples). As a control, MEFs were infected with adenoviral GFP (5 samples).  RNA was isolated using Trizol 7 days after infection. RNA was further prepared by passage over an RNeasy column. cDNA synthesis, biotinylation of cRNA and hybridization to mouse Genechip 430A v2 containing 39,000 probes was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions (Affymetrix, Santa Clara). Microarray data was normalized with Expression Console software (Affymetrix, Santa Clara) using RMA algorithms.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

