TITLE
Gene expression profiling soybean stem tissue early response to Sclerotinia sclerotiorum 4

ORGANISM
Glycine max

SUMMARY
White mold disease, caused by Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (Lib) de Bary, can be a serious disease of crops grown under cool moist environments. In many plants, like soybean [Glycine max (L.) Merr.], complete genetic resistance does not exist. To identify possible genes involved in defense against this pathogen, and to determine possible physiological changes that occur during infection, a microarray screen was conducted using stem tissue to evaluate changes in gene expression between partially resistant and susceptible soybean genotypes at 8 and 14 hours post inoculation. RNA from 15 day old inoculated plants was labeled and hybridized to soybean cDNA microarrays. ANOVA identified 1270 significant genes from the comparison between time points and 105 genes from the comparison between genotypes. Selected genes were classified into functional categories. The analyses identified changes in cell-wall composition and signaling pathways, as well as suggesting a role for anthocyanin and anthocianidin synthesis in the defense against S. sclerotiorum. In-silico mapping of both the differentially expressed transcripts and of public markers associated with partial resistance to white mold, provided evidence of several differentially expressed genes being closely positioned to white mold resistance markers, with the two most promising genes encoding a PR-5 and anthocyanidin synthase. Keywords = white mould Keywords = necrotroph Keywords = oxalic acid Keywords = defense Keywords = ANOVA Keywords = PI 194639 Keywords = plant Keywords: plant microbe interaction

DESIGN
loop design, 4 comparisons, 2 technical repeats including dye swaps, 3 biological repeats

PLATFORM
GPL6009 Keck Glycine max 18kB cDNA array_prints 201-206

CITATIONS
Bernarda Calla, Tri Vuong, Osman Radwan, Glen L. Hartman, and Steven J. Clough. 2009. Gene expression profiling soybean stem tissue early response to Sclerotinia sclerotiorum and in silico mapping in relation to resistance markers. The Plant Genome. 2:149-166. doi:10.3835/plantgenome2008.02.0008

