TITLE
Electric pulses do not change expression profile of genes involved in development of cancer in malignant melanoma cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Electroporation is a versatile method for in vitro or in vivo delivery of different molecules into cells. However, no study so far has analysed the effects of electric pulses used in electrochemotherapy (ECT pulses) or electric pulses used in electrogene therapy (EGT pulses) on malignant cells. We studied the effect of ECT and EGT pulses in human malignant melanoma cells in vitro in order to understand and predict possible effect of electric pulses on gene expression and their possible effect on cell behaviour. We used microarrays with 2698 different oligonucleotides to obtain expression profile of genes involved in apoptosis and development of cancer in a malignant melanoma cell line (SK-MEL28) exposed to ECT pulses and EGT pulses. Cells exposed to ECT pulses showed 68.8% average survival rate and 31.4% average survival rate in cells exposed to EGT pulses. Only seven common genes were found differentially expressed in cells 16 h after exposure to ECT and EGT pulses. We found that ECT and EGT pulses induce HSP70 stress response mechanism, repress histone protein H4, a major protein involved in chromatin assembly, and down-regulate components involved in protein synthesis. Our results show that electroporation does not significantly change expression profile of major tumour suppressor genes or oncogenes of cell cycle. Moreover, electroporation also does not changes the expression of genes involved in stability of DNA, supporting the current evidence that electroporation is a safe method that does not promote tumorigenesis. However, in spite of being considered an isothermal method it does to some extent induce stress that resulted in expression of environmental stress response mechanism, HSP70.

DESIGN
The difference in expression of genes involved in development of cancer was obtained by comparison of malignant melanoma cells exposed to EGT or ECT pulses against the same untreated malignant melanoma cells. In our experimental design, microarrays with 2698 different genes were used as a dual colour system in which exposed and non-exposed cells’ mRNA were separately labelled, mixed and hybridised together on each array. Only microarrays expressing at least 50% of genes were used for further analysis. All oligonucleotides on the same array were spotted in quadruplicates and each microarray analysis was performed in duplicates, therefore obtaining eight measurements of the same oligonucleotide. The acquired data were analysed with Acuity 4.0 to select reliable signals. Only genes, present in both duplicated microarrays were considered for further processing.

PLATFORM
GPL7502 VMarray Homo sapiens 3.1K cancer apoptosis

CITATIONS
19709437

