TITLE
Transcriptome analysis of Aspergillus fumigatus delta crzA mutant upon 10 and 30 minutes treatment with CaCl2 (200 mM)

ORGANISM
Aspergillus fumigatus

SUMMARY
CRZ is a C2H2 zinc finger transcription factor activated by calcineurin, a protein phosphatase activated by calcium-calmodulin, in different stress conditions related with calcium cell accumulation. CRZ binds to a specific element on the promoter region of genes called CDRE (calcineurin-dependent response element) shown to be sufficient for calcium- and calcineurin-dependent gene expression. In order to investigate which pathways are involved under calcium stress conditions, we determined the transcriptional profile of A. fumigatus delta crzA mutant strain upon a time course 200 mM calcium chloride treatment. Conidia from the mutant and wild type strains were incubated at 37°C in complete medium for 16 hours and were challenged with 200 mM calcium chloride for 10 and 30 minutes. At each time point, the mycelia were harvested by centrifugation and used for competitive microarray hybridizations. We were able to observe a decreased mRNA expression of genes encoding inorganic ion transport proteins and lipid transport. In contrast, increased mRNA expression was observed for several genes involved in transcription, energy production and conversion, cell cycle control, cell division, chromosome partitioning, amino acid, lipid and carbohydrate transport and metabolism, nucleotide transport, cell wall and membrane biogenesis, posttranslation modifications, protein turnover, chaperones, inorganic ion transport, signal transduction mechanisms, intracellular trafficking, secretion and vesicular transport. Keywords: gene expression array-based (log2 ratio)

DESIGN
For the time course microarray experiments, 5.0 x 108 conidia of A. fumigatus wild type [CEA17 delta akuB(KU80)] and delta crzA strains were inoculated in 300 ml of pre-warmed liquid cultures (YG) in 500-mL erlenmeyer flasks and allowed to grow for 16 hours in a reciprocal shaker (250 rpm) at 37°C. After this time, the cultures were added by calcium chloride (200 mM) and incubated for 10 and 30 more minutes before mycelia recovery and RNA extraction. Hybridization experiments were competitive using probes derived from calcium chloride shock cultures using the wild type strain exposed to calcium (10 or 30 minutes)  as the reference RNA for every hybridizantion. Normalized signal intensities were used to generate relative hybridization ratios (query/reference). Following normalization, the values for each gene's in-slide replicates were averaged (median variance < 0.01), and corresponding flip-dye replicates were averaged to compensate for dye-specific effects. These final, processed data are linked below as supplementary files.

PLATFORM
GPL6085 TIGR PFGRC Aspergillus fumigatus v2 array designed primarily based on strain Af293 GPL8346 TIGR PFGRC Aspergillus fumigatus 22K v3 array (designed primarily based on strain Af293)

CITATIONS
20078882

