TITLE
Diverse expression patterns for secondary metabolism gene clusters from Aspergillus

ORGANISM
Aspergillus flavus ; Aspergillus oryzae

SUMMARY
Diverse expression patterns for secondary metabolism gene clusters from Aspergillus flavus under different environmental conditions and in genetic mutants:  Insights into regulation of cyclopiazonic acid along with aflatoxin Species of Aspergillus produce a diverse array of secondary metabolites, and recent genomic analysis predicts that these species have the capacity to synthesize many more compounds. It has been possible to infer the presence of 55 gene clusters associated with secondary metabolism in A. flavus. Presumably, secondary metabolites play important roles in the ecology of the producing species, but functions for most secondary metabolites remain unknown. Only three metabolic pathways have been associated with the predicted clusters in A. flavus. These include aflatoxin, cyclopiazonic acid (CPA), and aflatrem. To gain insight into the regulation of, and infer ecological significance for the 55 secondary metabolite gene clusters predicted in A. flavus, we examined their expression over 28 diverse conditions. Variables included culture media and temperature, fungal development, colonization of developing maize seeds, and misexpression of laeA, the global regulator of secondary metabolism. Hierarchical clustering analysis of expression profiles allowed us to categorize the gene clusters into four distinct clades.  Gene clusters for the production of aflatoxins, CPA, and seven other unknown compound(s) were identified as belonging to one clade. To further explore the relationships found by gene expression analysis, aflatoxin and CPA production were quantified under five different cell culture environments known to be conducive or non-conducive for aflatoxin biosynthesis and during colonization of developing maize seeds. Results from these studies showed that secondary metabolism gene clusters have distinctive gene expression profiles. Aflatoxin and CPA were found to have unique regulation but similar enough that they would be expected to co-occur in commodities colonized with A. flavus.

DESIGN
Analysis of 75 different microarrays examining gene expression of A. flavus and A. oryzae over various conditions

PLATFORM
GPL8345 [Flavus_22683_AFLAVUSa520391F] NCSU Payne_Aspergillus Array

CITATIONS
20447271

