TITLE
Small RNAs serve as a genetic buffer against genomic shock in Arabidopsis interspecific hybrids and allopolyploids

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana ; Arabidopsis arenosa ; Arabidopsis suecica ; Arabidopsis arenosa x Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are produced in diverse species and control gene expression and epigenetic regulation. Although physiological and developmental roles of miRNAs and siRNAs have been extensively studied in plants and animals, expression diversity and evolution of miRNAs and siRNAs in closely related species are poorly understood. Here we report comprehensive analyses of miRNA expression and siRNA distribution in two closely related species (Arabidopsis thaliana and A. arenosa), a natural allotetraploid (A. suecica), and two resynthesized allotetraploid lines (F1 and F7) derived from A. thaliana and A. arenosa. The siRNA populations present in A. thaliana were maintained in resynthesized allotetraploids and A. suecica. Although miRNA sequences were highly conserved, their expression patterns were highly variable between the allotetraploids and their progenitors. Significantly, many miRNAs were nonadditively expressed in the allotetraploids relative to the parents and preferentially degraded A. thaliana or A. arenosa targets. Stable inheritance of parental siRNAs in allopolyploids helps maintain genome stability in response to “genomic shock”, whereas expression diversity of miRNAs and their target preference lead to interspecies variation in gene expression, growth, and development. NOTE: sff files unavailable for Samples AaL and F1L.

DESIGN
10 samples examined: Arabidopsis thaliana leaf, flower, Arabidopsis arenosa leaf and flower, F1 synthetic allopolyploid leaf and flower, F7 synthetic allopolyploid leaf and flower, Arabidopsis suecica leaf and flower. To determine small RNA profiles in Arabidopsis allotetraploids and their progenitors, we made 10 small RNA libraries from rosette leaves (L) and flower buds (F) in five lines, A. thaliana, A. arenosa, Allo(F1), Allo733(F7), and A. suecica. To examine expression of small RNAs among related species and their hybrids, we employed miRNA microarrays and compared small RNA levels.

PLATFORM
GPL8814 Arabidopsis thaliana microRNA 0.35K microarray GPL9386 454 GS (Arabidopsis thaliana) GPL9414 454 GS (Arabidopsis arenosa) GPL9415 454 GS (Arabidopsis suecica) GPL18731 454 GS (Arabidopsis arenosa; Arabidopsis thaliana)

CITATIONS
19805056

