TITLE
Global Gene Expression in Deceased Donor Liver Transplantation with Ischemic Preconditioning

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The clear benefits of ischemic preconditioning (IPC) in reducing ischemia reperfusion injury (IRI) remain indistinct in human liver transplantation. To further understand the mechanistic aspects of IPC in human deceased donor liver transplantation (DDLT), we performed microarray analyses to determine global gene expression profiles associated with IPC administration. Donor and recipient characteristics in both groups were comparable. Clinical data from our study subset and larger trial were similar.  IPC increased expression of 10 transcripts at either time point with roles in: antioxidant defenses, immunological response, lipid biosynthesis, and xenobiotic metabolism.  IPC decreased the expression of 1 cell development related transcript.  Conclusions: 1) IPC in DDLT increased the expression of antioxidant transcripts similar to studies in animal IPC, anesthetic, and remote IPC.  2) IPC increased expression of lipogenic transcripts, which may be relevant to the clinically observed increased IRI in our IPC group. 3) Our microarray findings support our clinical observations and are compatible with the varied outcomes of hepatic IPC studies in human liver transplantation.

DESIGN
We conducted a nested sub-study in 12/101 subjects enrolled in a prospective randomized trial of 10 min IPC in DDLT during 2003-2006.  Liver biopsies were performed at the end of cold storage and at 90 minutes after allograft reperfusion. Six biopsy pairs from both IPC and No IPC (STD) groups within a narrow donor risk index range were selected. Total RNA was extracted and hybridized with Affymetrix GeneChip Human Gene 1.0 ST Array. IPC effects were examined by comparing IPC vs. STD at both time points. Transcripts whose expression changed 2-fold with p < 0.05 were considered significant.

PLATFORM
GPL6244 [HuGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

