TITLE
Comparative transcript profiling of plant virus synergism

ORGANISM
Nicotiana benthamiana

SUMMARY
Many virus diseases of economic importance to agriculture result from mixtures of different pathogens invading the host at a given time. This contrasts with the relatively scarce studies available on the molecular events associated with virus-host interactions in mixed infections. In comparison to single infections, co-infection of Nicotiana benthamiana with Potato virus X (PVX) and Potato virus Y (PVY) resulted in increased systemic symptoms (synergism) that led to necrosis of the newly emerging leaves, and the plant death. A comparative transcriptional analysis was undertaken to identify quantitative and qualitative differences in gene expression during this synergistic infection, and to correlate these changes with the severe symptoms it caused. Global transcription profiles of doubly-infected leaves were compared with those from singly-infected leaves using gene ontology enrichment analysis and metabolic pathway annotator software. Functional gene categories altered by the double infection comprise suites of genes regulated coordinately, which are associated with chloroplast functions (down-regulated), protein synthesis and degradation (up-regulated), carbohydrate metabolism (up-regulated), and response to biotic stimulus and stress (up-regulated). The expression of reactive oxygen species-generating enzymes as well as several mitogen-activated protein kinases, were also significantly induced. Accordingly, synergistic infection induced a severe oxidative stress in N. benthamiana leaves, as judged by increases in lipid peroxidation, and by the generation of superoxide radicals in chloroplasts, which correlated with the misregulation of antioxidative genes in microarray data. Interestingly, expression of genes encoding oxylipin biosynthesis was uniquely up-regulated by the synergistic infection. Virus-induced gene silencing of alfa-dioxygenase1 delayed cell death during PVX-PVY infection.

DESIGN
Using mock inoculated leaf tissue as a reference, we compare the gene expression profiles of Nicotiana benthamiana plants infected with one of two viruses, Potato virus X (PVX) or Potato virus Y (PVY), or the combination PVX plus PVY. 3 biological replicates per treatment were independently grown and haversted.

PLATFORM
GPL3838 Potato 10k cDNA array version 4

CITATIONS
19810812

