TITLE
Transcriptome profiling identifies HMGA2 as a novel gene in melanoma progression

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The identification of novel tumor-specific markers may improve understanding of melanoma progression and prognostic accuracy. Whole genome expression profiling of 46 primary melanomas, 12 metastases, and 16 normal skin samples using Affymetrix U133 PLUS 2.0 array generated gene lists including both known and new melanoma genes. The molecular genetic alterations contributing to the pathogenesis of melanoma are incompletely defined and few independent prognostic features have been identified beyond the pathologic characteristics of the primary tumor. Early stage melanoma is frequently curable, in contrast to the inferior prognosis of melanomas with regional lymph nodes involvement and the incurability of distant metastatic disease. The identification of novel tumor-specific markers may improve our understanding of melanoma progression and prognostic accuracy. To find differentially expressed genes that can distinguish melanoma from normal tissue, we performed a whole genome expression profiling of 46 primary melanoma samples, 12 regional or distant metastases, and 16 normal skin samples using Affymetrix U133 2.0 Plus array. Our study generated lists of differentially expressed genes in melanoma and identified novel prognostic marker HMGA2. It is  a novel, highly overexpressed melanoma gene associated with poor prognosis. The overexpression of HMGA2 is strongly associated with regional and distant metastases and serves as an independent predictor of disease-free survival and overall survival in melanoma.

DESIGN
Melanoma samples were obtained through an IRB-approved protocol using informed consent at the University of Michigan Multidisciplinary Melanoma Clinic.  A portion of pigmented lesions clinically suspicious for melanoma and known melanoma were sampled by punch biopsy at the time of excision. The punch biopsy was bisected; half was sent to for clinical diagnosis and the other half along with adjacent normal skin when available immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Snap-frozen tissue was embedded in OCT (TissueTek) followed by frozen sectioning and H & E slide preparation. The slides were evaluated by dermatopathologist who identified areas with greater than 70% tumor cellularity, which were sampled for RNA extraction. Primary melanomas and melanoma metastases were derived from different patients. Metastatic samples included lymph nodes (n=8), subcutaneous soft tissue (n=2), spleen (n=1), and small intestine (n=1).

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
23633021

