TITLE
Meta-transcriptome analysis of a natural spelt sourdough ecosystem during a 10-day spontaneous laboratory fermentation.

ORGANISM
Leuconostoc mesenteroides ; Oenococcus oeni ; Pediococcus acidilactici ; Pediococcus pentosaceus ; Staphylococcus aureus ; Streptococcus thermophilus ; Enterococcus faecalis ; Enterococcus faecium ; Enterococcus hirae ; Lactococcus lactis ; Lactobacillus acidophilus ; Lactobacillus brevis ; Lactobacillus buchneri ; Lactobacillus casei ; Weissella confusa ; Lactobacillus delbrueckii ; Lactobacillus helveticus ; Lactobacillus hilgardii ; Lactobacillus pentosus ; Lactobacillus plantarum ; Lactobacillus gasseri ; Lactobacillus paracasei ; Lactobacillus reuteri ; Lactobacillus sakei ; Lactobacillus alimentarius ; Lactobacillus amylovorus ; Lactobacillus farciminis ; Lactobacillus fermentum ; Lactobacillus fructivorans ; Lactobacillus sanfranciscensis ; Bifidobacterium ; Brevibacterium linens ; Lactobacillus curvatus ; Lactobacillus johnsonii ; Leuconostoc citreum ; Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides ; Lactobacillus pontis ; Enterococcus casseliflavus ; Staphylococcus lentus ; Lactobacillus panis ; Lactobacillus rhamnosus ; Lactobacillus crispatus ; Enterococcus mundtii ; Lactobacillus paraplantarum ; Lactobacillus paralimentarius ; Lactobacillus frumenti ; Lactobacillus parabuchneri ; Lactobacillus mindensis ; Lactobacillus rossiae

SUMMARY
Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are of industrial importance in the production of fermented foods, among which sourdough-derived products. Despite their limited metabolic capacity LAB contribute considerably to important characteristics of fermented foods, among which extended shelf-life, microbial safety, improved texture, and enhanced organoleptic properties. Thanks to the considerable amount of LAB genomic information that became available during the last years, transcriptome, and by extension meta-transcriptome studies, are the exquisite research approaches to study whole ecosystem gene expression into more detail. In this study, microarray analyses were performed using RNA sampled during four 10-day spontaneous sourdough fermentations carried out in the laboratory, namely two wheat and two spelt fermentations with daily back-slopping. Hereto, the in-house developed functional gene LAB microarray was used, representing 406 genes that play a key role in sugar and nitrogen metabolism, functional metabolite production, stress responses and health and safety characteristics. The results reveal the activation of different key metabolic pathways, the ability to use different energy sources, and successful acid and oxidative stress responses. Also, a new algorithm was developed to compute a net expression profile for each of the represented genes, thereby exceeding the species level.

DESIGN
The labeled aRNA of the sourdough fermentation samples was hybridized using a loop design, i.e. subsequent samples (e.g. 27 h and 51 h, 51 h and 75 h etc.) were hybridized together on the microarray and the loop was closed by hybridizing the last sample with the first.

PLATFORM
GPL5459 SBO_LAB_2k_version1

CITATIONS
20581179 , 21097589

