TITLE
MicroRNA signature of thyroid tumors of uncertain malignancy

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Well-differentiated tumours (WDT) of the thyroid gland can be difficult to diagnose. Focal nuclear clearing can be suggestive of a papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), while questionable vascular or capsular penetration may raise the possibility of diagnosis of a follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC). The recently proposed term “thyroid tumours of uncertain malignant potential” (TT-UMP) defines cases showing inconclusive morphological evidence of malignancy. We use microRNA (miRNA) expression profiling to analyze 42 well differentiated thyroid tumours including 7 follicular tumours of uncertain malignant potential (FT-UMP), 6 well differentiated tumours of uncertain malignant potential (WDT-UMP), 7 follicular thyroid adenomas (FTA), 5 follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma (FV-PTC) 6 follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC), and 11 conventional papillary thyroid carcinoma (C-PTC) with 6 C-PTC mutated for BRAFV600E (C-PTC-mut) and 5 not mutated: wild type (C-PTC-wt). Comparison of these 13 tumours of uncertain malignant potential (7 FT-UMP and 6 WDT-UMP) with those obtained from 16 PTC (11 C-PTC and 5 FV-PTC), 6 FTC and 7 FTA is performed in order to clarify the relationships between TT-UMP and the morphologically well characterized categories of thyroid tumours (i.e. C-PTC, FV-PTC, FTC and FTA). In first, each pathological sample (“L” for Lesional tissue) is compared with its matched control (“S” for Safe tissue) for the 42 patients (84 miRNA microarray slides). This control was taken from the same patient at a large distance from the tumour. Secondly, the perilesional tissue from the same patients but 2 (1 PTC and 1 adenoma, without enough RNA left) is compared to normal thyroid tissue (safe tissue reference) obtained from a patient who underwent total thyroidectomy for a laryngeal carcinoma that partially invaded the thyroid gland, to search for microRNA signatures of perilesional tissues (80 miRNA microarray slides).Experiments is performed with a miRNA microarray, referenced in GEO under the accession number GPL4717 ( ).

DESIGN
42 Patients: 7 FT-UMP, 6 WDT-UMP, 7 FTA (+1 duplicate sample), 5 FV-PTC, 6 FTC (+ 2 duplicate samples), and 11 C-PTC.  44 dye-swap pairs and 1 with no dye swap pair for a total of 89 samples.

