TITLE
Effect of IL-1 alpha, TNF alpha, or IFN gamma on gene expression levels in thyroid follicles (Euthyroid Graves' Disease)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Graves’ disease is characterized by goiter, palpitation and exophthalmos (Merseburg’s trias). However, a few patients develop exophthalmos even though their thyroid function is normal, a condition known as euthyroid Graves’ disease (EGD). It remains unknown why these patients remain euthyroid, even though they have potent thyroid-stimulating antibody (TSAb).  To investigate whether the immunoglobulins (IgGs) obtained from EGD patients elicit thyroid hormone-releasing activity (THRA), thyroid follicles obtained from Graves’ patients were cultured in agarose-coated culture dishes, and 125I incorporated into the thyroid follicles and organic 125I (mainly de novo-synthesized 125I-T3+125I-T4) released into the culture medium by TSH or purified IgGs were determined as thyroid hormone-releasing activity (THRA). This thyroid follicle culture system allows maintenance of the Wolff-Chaikoff effect, and the expression of mRNA for the sodium-iodide symporter is decreased by high concentrations of iodide (10-6-10-4M) and therapeutic concentrations of amiodarone (1-2microM).  hTSH elicited THRA most efficiently at 0.4-10 microU/ml, suggesting that thyroid function is controlled within the normal range of TSH concentration (0.4-4.0 microU/ml). All IgGs obtained from hyperthyroid Graves’ patients elicited THRA equivalent to more than 4.6 microU/ml hTSH. IgGs obtained from EGD patients also had potent THRA, whereas IgGs obtained from normal subjects and Graves’ patients in complete remission had no significant THRA.    When thyroid follicles from Graves’ thyroid, into which a number of lymphocytes had infiltrated, were used, only slight THRA was elicited by bTSH or Graves’ IgGs, probably due to inflammatory cytokines produced by immunocompetent cells that could not be separated during gentle centrifugation. Indeed, when thyroid follicles were cultured with autologous intrathyroidal lymphocytes, interleukin-2 completely abolished TSH-induced THRA.   When thyroid follicles were cultured with inflammatory cytokines (interleukin-1, tumor-necrosis factor-alpha, or interferon-gamma), each cytokine inhibited TSH-induced THRA in a concentration-dependent manner. These cytokines at lower concentrations synergistically and completely inhibited TSH-induced THRA. Microarray analyses of thyroid follicles cultured with IL-1alpha, TNF-alpha, or INF-gamma revealed decreased expression of mRNAs for TSHR, NIS, TPO and thyroglobulin, accompanied by increased expression of mRNAs for chemokines and cytokines.   These findings suggest that IgGs obtained from patients with EGD have potent THRA in vitro, whereas in vivo, these IgGs are unable to elicit biological activity in the thyroid gland. Presumably, immunocompetent cells that infiltrate the thyroid gland produce inflammatory cytokines that synergistically inhibit thyroid function. Since a similar phenomenon may occur in the retroorbital tissues, these patients may develop exophthalmos despite having a normal serum level of TSH. This data will be published in Hyperthyroidism: Etiology, Diagnosis and Treatment (editor-in-chief;Dr.Frank Clumbus,Nova Science Publishers, Inc, New York, USA)

DESIGN
One conditioned experiments: control vs. IL-1 alpha 5ng/ml, cultured for 24 hours; control vs. TNF alpha 20ng/ml, cultured for 24 hours; control vs. IFN gamma 1000U/ml, cultured for 48 hours.

