TITLE
Bone marrow grown with vitamin D compared to bone marrow grown with vitamin D plus M-CSF

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Osteoclast differentiation and activation requires the presence of osteoblast-derived factors such as Macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF) and receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL). RANKL is influenced by osteotropic hormones such as calcitriol 1,25(OH)2D3 (vitamin D).The aim of this study is to evaluate the combined effect of vitamin D and M-CSF on murine bone marrow and on murine spleen cell, to define when the inhibitory effect of vitamin D plus M-CSF is maximum and what are the mechanisms involved in this inhibition. When murine bone marrow cells were cultured with 10-8 M vitamin D and 60 ng/ml M-CSF, there was a significant decrease in osteoclasts formation (3.13±3.44),compared to bone marrow cells cultured with vitamin D alone (80.86 ±45.02; p < 0.05). Even when the amount of M-CSF added to the bone marrow cell culture was 1 ng/ml there was a 40% decrease in osteoclasts formation. Since bone marrow contains also stromal cells, we eliminate their influence by culturing murine spleen cells with 10-8 M vitamin D, 60 ng/ml M-CSF and RANKL 20 ng/ml. There was a significant decrease in osteoclasts formation (41±14.14) compared to spleen cells cultured with M-CSF and RANKL (215.67±46.44); p < 0.05).  These data lead to hypothesize that vitamin D and M-CSF together exert an inhibitory effect on osteoclast differentiation and development. To define the cellular mechanism involved in this inhibition we analyzed gene array data of bone marrow cells cultured with vitamin D and compare them with the cells cultured with vitamin D and M-CSF. Activation Toll like receptors after addition of vitamin D plus M-CSF to bone marrow cells appears to be involved in the inhibition of osteoclast differentiation. Keywords: parallel sample

PLATFORM
GPL1170 SuperArray GEArray Q Series Mouse NFkB Signaling Pathway Gene Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

