TITLE
Comparison of gene expression in whole blood of mice subjected to chemical hypoxia in vivo.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
To understand hypoxia mediated changes in whole blood, normal C57Bl/10 mice were gradually exposed to a chronic chemical hypoxic environment, for 2 weeks. Control, age-machted mice were maintained under normoxic conditions.

DESIGN
Purpose: To examine and characterize the expression profile of genes expressed at chemical hypoxia of whole blood in comparison to the control. Methods: At the beginning of the experiment mice were divided into two groups, control (room condition) and chemical hypoxic (room condition). For conditioning, the chemical hypoxic group was supplemented with 200ng of CoCl2 per 100ml/day. Animal’s weight and food intake were monitored daily. Food and water were changed daily during the course of the experiment. Before and after the experiments the hematocrit was monitored by taking blood from the tail vein of control and hypoxic animals. After 15 days animals were euthanized using CO2 after whole blood extraction from V. Cava for further analysis. RNA from whole blood was isolated, processed and used for microarray-based expression profiling. Profiles were generated for genes differentially expressed at control versus chemical hypoxia in whole blood using a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0%.We validated the profiles by real-time quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Results: The regional transcriptomes associated with chemical hypoxia in whole blood were identified. We found 3094 genes that were differentially expressed in chemical hypoxic whole blood compared to control with a 0% FDR and a 2 fold cutoff. Conclusion: Transcriptome level differences exist between control and chemical hypoxia in whole blood. Our definition of the synaptic transcriptome provides insight into the functioning of the unique response to hypoxia in whole blood.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

