TITLE
Differentially Expressed Genes between Drought-tolerant and Drought-sensitive Barley Genotypes

ORGANISM
Hordeum vulgare

SUMMARY
Drought tolerance is a key trait for increasing and stabilizing barley productivity in dry areas worldwide. Identification of the genes responsible for drought tolerance in barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) will facilitate understanding of the molecular mechanisms of drought tolerance, and also genetic improvement of barley through marker-assisted selection or gene transformation. To monitor the changes in gene expression at transcription levels in barley leaves during the reproductive stage under drought conditions, the 22K Affymetrix Barley 1 microarray was used to screen two drought-tolerant barley genotypes, Martin and Hordeum spontaneum 41-1 (HS41-1), and one drought-sensitive genotype Moroc9-75. Seventeen genes were expressed exclusively in the two drought-tolerant genotypes under drought stress, and their encoded proteins may play significant roles in enhancing drought tolerance through controlling stomatal closure via carbon metabolism (NADP malic enzyme (NADP-ME) and pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), synthesizing the osmoprotectant glycine-betaine (C-4 sterol methyl oxidase (CSMO), generating protectants against reactive-oxygen-species scavenging (aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), ascorbate-dependant oxidoreductase (ADOR), and stabilizing membranes and proteins (heat-shock protein 17.8 (HSP17.8) and dehydrin 3 (DHN3). Moreover, 17 genes were abundantly expressed in Martin and HS41-1 compared with Moroc9-75 under both drought and control conditions. These genes were likely constitutively expressed in drought-tolerant genotypes. Among them, 7 known annotated genes might enhance drought tolerance through signaling (such as calcium-dependent protein kinase (CDPK) and membrane steroid binding protein (MSBP), anti-senescence (G2 pea dark accumulated protein GDA2) and detoxification (glutathione S-transferase (GST) pathways. In addition, 18 genes, including those encoding Δl-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase (P5CS), protein phosphatase 2C-like protein (PP2C) and several chaperones, were differentially expressed in all genotypes under drought; thus, they were more likely general drought-responsive genes in barley. These results could provide new insights into further understanding of drought-tolerance mechanisms in barley.

DESIGN
Seven flag leaves of a replication for each genotype were harvested at 0 d, 1 d, 3 d and 5 d after reach 10% of AWC in the soil to constitute a single biological replicate. These flag leaves were employed for RNA isolation by using Trizol reagent following the manufacturer’s protocol (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany). The RNA was further purified using RNeasy Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). RNA yield and quality were determined by using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Techologies, Boblingen, Germany). A table of the average, log2 RMA signal intensity values of three biological replicates for each Sample is linked below as a supplementary file.

PLATFORM
GPL1340 [Barley1] Affymetrix Barley Genome Array

CITATIONS
19561048

