TITLE
Effect of Xpcl1 integration and p27Kip1 deletion on gene expression in MuMLV lymphomas

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Mice lacking the p27Kip1 Cdk inhibitor (Cdkn1b) exhibit increased susceptibility to lymphomas from the Maloney murine leukemia virus (M-MuLV), and exhibit a high frequency of viral integrations at Xpcl1 (Kis2), a locus on the X-chromosome. Xpcl1 encodes miR-106a~363, a cluster of microRNAs that are expressed in response to adjacent retroviral integrations. We report the first large-scale profile of microRNA expression in MuLV-induced lymphomas, in combination with microarray gene expression analysis. The source material was T-cell lymphomas induced by M-MuLV in p27Kip1 knockout mice and normal thymus. Surprisingly, the overall levels of miRNA expression were equivalent in lymphomas and normal thymus. Nonetheless, the expression of specific microRNAs was altered in tumors. The miR-106a~363 miRNA were over-expressed in lymphomas, particularly those with viral integrations at the Xpcl1 locus. In contrast, p27Kip1 deletion itself was associated with a different pattern of microRNA expression. Gene expression was dramatically altered in lymphomas, yet paralleled data from T-cell lymphomas induced by other mechanisms. Genes with altered expression in association with the p27Kip1 null genotype were of similar functional classes to those associated with Xpcl1 integration, but with the opposite pattern of expression. Thus, the effect of p27Kip1 deletion may be to oppose an anti-oncogenic effect of Xpcl1 rather than enhancing its oncogenic functions. A subset of miR-106a~363 target genes was consistently reduced in lymphomas with Xpcl1 integrations, particularly genes with cell cycle and immune functions. We identify four predicted target genes of miR-106a~363 miRNA, including N-Myc (Mycn), and the TGF-beta receptor (Tgfbr2) using 3'UTR reporter assays. Still, bioinformatic miRNA target predictions were poor predictors of altered gene expression in lymphomas with Xpcl1 integration. Confirmation of miR- 106a~363 gene targeting relevant to the tumor phenotype requires in vivo validation, because only a subset of predicted targets are consistently reduced in tumors that overexpress miR- 106a~363.

DESIGN
Total RNA was prepared from 17 lymphoma samples arising in MuMLV infected mice.  A subset of the animals had homozygous p27 deletions.  In addition 3 samples of normal thymic RNA were collected as a comparison group.  Equal amounts of RNA from of all samples were pooled as a common reference for co-hybridization on 2-color expression arrays.  Each sample was run in duplicate with a dye (Cy5 vs Cy3) swap.

PLATFORM
GPL8525 Rosetta/Merck Mouse 44k 1.0 microarray (with 2D spot locations)

CITATIONS
21412408

