TITLE
Prostates of rats with induced partial bladder outlet obstruction and the effect of Eviprostat on those changes

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Prostatic inflammation plays a role in the progression of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Eviprostat is an antiinflammatory and antioxidant phytotherapeutic agent widely used to treat lower urinary tract symptoms in BPH. However, because Eviprostat is a mixture of compounds from multiple natural sources, its mechanism of action has been difficult to investigate. In this study, we used oligonucleotide microarrays to identify changes in gene expression that occur in the prostate of rats with surgically induced partial bladder outlet obstruction and the effect of Eviprostat on those changes.

DESIGN
Male rats were divided into four groups of five or six animals each. The rats in groups 1 and 2 underwent a sham operation. Five days after the sham operation, group 1 was treated twice a day with vehicle (0.1% (w/v) Tween 80; sham/vehicle group) and group 2 was treated twice a day with 18 mg/kg Eviprostat (36 mg/kg daily; sham/Eviprostat group). The rats in groups 3 and 4 underwent surgical partial bladder outlet obstruction. Briefly, with the rat in the supine position, a midline suprapubic incision was made and the bilateral prostate was retracted to expose the neck of the bladder and the urethra, care being taken not to damage the bladder. The loose connective tissue at the base of the bladder was dissected away from the proximal urethra. A rubber ring was cut open and placed around the proximal urethra, and a 4-0 silk ligature was tied around the rubber ring. From the day after the operation, group 3 was treated twice a day for five days with vehicle (operated/vehicle group) and group 4 was treated twice a day for five days with 18 mg/kg Eviprostat (36 mg/kg daily; operated/Eviprostat group). On the sixth day, 2 h after the last administration, the rats were sacrificed and the prostate was rapidly removed.

PLATFORM
GPL4135 Agilent-014879 Whole Rat Genome Microarray 4x44K G4131F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
19616448

