TITLE
Gene profiling, mutations and expression of epidermal growth factor receptor in androgen-dependent prostate cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
We analyzed mutations in Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR)  Tyrosine kinase (TK) domain, EGFR expression and gene profiling in prostate carcinoma (PC) in order to find out molecular prognostic markers and supply a proof for EGFR targeted therapies. 100 glyofixx-fixed, paraffin-embedded PC specimens were recovered after radical prostatectomy from locally advanced PC patients. Exons from 18 to 21 of EGFR TK domain were amplified and sequenced. For the entire cohort, EGFR protein evaluation by immunohistochemistry was performed. Gene expression profile was analyzed on 51 out of 100 samples by whole genome microarray. Statistical tests were performed in order to detect any significant association between EGFR iperexpression and prognosis. None out of 100 specimens presented mutations in exon 18; 2 point mutations were identified in exon 19, 5 in exon 20 and 6 in exon 21. In addiction, 58 out of 100 patients had the same silent mutation, at codon 787 in exon 20. EGFR iper-expression was found in 36% of specimens and was significantly associated with biochemical relapse. Gene profiling analysis on mutated samples selected 29 modulated genes differentially expressed between mutated EGFR+ and mutated EGFR- samples; 4 down-regulated genes, EAF2, ABCC4, KLK3 and ANXA3 and one up-regulated gene, FOXC1, are involved in prostate cancer progression. Our findings suggest that a subgroup of PC patients could potentially benefit of EGFR targeted therapies. The EGFR protein evaluation could contribute to identify PC relapsers. Keywords: EGFR expression, TK mutations, target therapy, microarray data.

DESIGN
In this work we studied mutation status and expression of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) in a case series of 100 primary prostate cancer tissue specimens. Results indicate that 13% and 36% of PC patients presents EGFR tyrosine kinase domain mutations and iperexpression respectively, suggesting that this receptor could be a therapeutic target in progressive prostate cancer.  The analysis of correlation between EGFR protein expression, mutations, clinical parameters and outcome allow us to identify EGFR as significantly associated with biochemical relapse and high Gleason score.   Gene expression profiling in 51 of PC tissues led to the identification of a gene list which separated EGFR mutated patients according to EGFR protein expression. These results could give more information on clinical outcome and possible development of new targeted therapies.

PLATFORM
GPL887 Agilent-012097 Human 1A Microarray (V2) G4110B (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
21266046

