TITLE
Timed induction of 10 transcription factors - ES time series data

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
To decipher the structure and behaviors of the transcription factor (TF) network, we created 50 permanent mouse ES cell lines, in each of which one of the 50 transcription factors tagged with FLAG, is inserted into the doxycycline (dox)-repressible ROSA26 locus. We have obtained time series data for 10 of the transcripts at 24h,48h and 72hr. Expression profiling reveals Cdx2 as the most potent inducer of transcriptome perturbation in ES cells, followed by Esx1, Sox9, Tcf3, Klf4, and Gata3. Immunoprecipitation (IP) with a FLAG-antibody in Cdx2-induced ES cells, identifies NuRD in CDX2-associated protein complexes; and chromatin-IP-sequencing identifies CDX2-binding sites predominantly in genes up-regulated by CDX2. Compendium analyses of Cdx2- and the other TF-inducible ES cells suggest a central role of the POU5F1/SOX2/NANOG protein complex in a swift-acting control mechanism to down-regulate a common set of genes at the beginning of multi-lineage ES cell differentiations. These ES cell lines will be a valuable resource to study biological networks in ES cells and mice. Keywords: dose response design,genetic modification design,individual genetic characteristic design,reference design,replicate design,time series design

DESIGN
MC1 mouse ES cells derived from 129S6/SvEvTac were cultured in DMEM with 15% FBS and LIF on feeder cells. Cells were electroporated with linearlized pMWROSATcH and selected by hygromycine B. Knock-in for ROSA-TET locus in ES[MC1R(20)] cells was confirmed by southern blotting. For exchange vectors, PCR amplified ORFs were subcloned into pZhcSfi that was modified to express His6-FLAG tagged protein and puromycin resistant gene. ES[MC1R(20)] cells (passage 17) cultured on feeder cells were co-transfected with sequence verified exchange vector and pCAGGS-Cre and selected by puromycin in the presence of doxycycline. Isolated clones were tested for Venus expression, hygromycin B susceptibility, transgene RNA expression, genotyping for Cre mediated integration, karyotyping, western blotting using anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma-Aldrich) and mycoplasma contamination. ES cells (passage 25) were plated onto gelatin-coated dish. Doxycycline was removed through washing 3 times with PBS at 3 hours intervals. Total RNA was isolated by TRIzol (Invitrogen) at time points indicated in the sample names. Cy3-CTP labeled sample targets were prepared with total RNA by Low RNA Input Fluorescent Linear Amplification Kit (Agilent). Cy5-CTP labeled reference target was produced from mixture of Stratagene Universal Mouse Reference RNA and MC1 cells RNA.

PLATFORM
GPL6867 NIA Mouse 44K Microarray v3.0 (Whole Genome 60-mer Oligo) [Agilent 015087]

CITATIONS
19796622

