TITLE
Hybrid Poplar H11-11 Systemic Herbivory Response Dataset 1

ORGANISM
Populus trichocarpa x Populus deltoides

SUMMARY
We investigated the transcriptional response of hybrid poplar (Populus trichocarpa x deltoides) source and sink leaves to simulated herbivory (mechanical wounding plus the application of Malacosoma disstria oral secretions) over a 24 hour time course. Experiments were conducted using clonal trees under greenhouse conditions at the University of British Columbia. We used the 15.5K poplar cDNA microarray platform previously described by Ralph et al. (Molecular Ecology 2006, 15:1275-1297). Differentially expressed genes were determined using three criteria: fold-change between treated and untreated control leaves > 1.5-fold, P value < 0.05 and Q value < 0.05. This study identified > 3,000 differentially expressed genes in response to simulated insect feeding damage, which possess distinct source/sink and treated/systemic patterns.

DESIGN
A factorial hybridization design was chosen to assess gene expression among the untreated control leaves, and leaves subjected to mechanical wounding plus the application of forest tent caterpillar (Malacosoma disstria) oral secretions. For each tree, the lowest five mature leaves were caged in nylon mesh bags, treated or left untreated as a control. Treated leaves, acropetally adjacent source leaves, and sink leaves at crown were harvested 2, 6 or 24 hours after the initiation of each treatment and total RNA was individually isolated from each leaf sample. For each treatment and time point, equal amounts of total RNA were combined from each of the five biological replicate trees prior to cDNA microarray analysis. Total RNA from treated source and untreated source and sink leaves was compared using a balanced loop consisting of direct and indirect comparisons across treatments and time points, with dye balance, using a total of 54 hybridizations.

PLATFORM
GPL5921 Treenomix poplar 15.5K cDNA microarray

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

