TITLE
Differential yeast gene transcription during brewery propagation

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces pastorianus

SUMMARY
The aim of this study was to determine the transcriptomic response of Saccharomyces pastorianus to environmental change during brewery propagation. Utilization of amino acids and fermentable carbohydrates during full-scale brewery propagation was compared to the simultaneous changes occurring in the yeast transcriptome. Transcription profiles were observed to fall within one of four different groups and the greatest changes were observed to occur within the first eight hours following inoculation. Nutrient uptake was at its greatest during this period and many genes involved in the utilization of amino acids and carbohydrates were activated. There was also a significant derepression response following monosaccharide exhaustion. A number of stress response genes were activated following inoculation, indicating a possible osmotic stress response. Nutrient limitation did not appear to initiate a significant stress response, but did activate genes involved in pseudohyphal growth and meiosis, despite the fact that neither biological process occurs in the strain utilized. The first hours after inoculation into propagation wort are particularly active with respect to nutrient utilization and transcriptional change. It is likely that this period is particularly stressful for the yeast cells though there is no evidence of viability loss and it may be concluded that the yeast cell can cope with this level of stress, possibly aided by the dynamic response of the transcriptome. Keywords: amino acid, brewing, carbohydrate, microarray, propagation, transcription, yeast

DESIGN
GeneChip analyses were performed to determine the transcriptomic response of Saccharomyces pastorianus to environmental change during brewery propagation. Triplicate samples were taken immediately after inoculation and at intervals 4h, 8h, and 30h.

PLATFORM
GPL2529 [Yeast_2] Affymetrix Yeast Genome 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

