TITLE
Gene expression profilling of metastatic melanoma cell lines

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Melanoma can progress rapidly from a slow-growing surgically curable lesion to aggressive metastatic disease, with high mortality and poor response to current therapies. The mechanisms underlying melanoma progression and resistance to therapeutic agents are not well understood. There are few treatment options for melanoma once it has metastasized, and new biomarkers that aid diagnosis, predict clinical outcome, and suggest new therapies are required. This aim of this study was to invesigate  the molecular basis of melanoma biology and heterogeneity by defining genomic characteristics that correlated with tumour phenotype in a novel panel of 25 cell lines derived largely from New Zealand patients with metastatic melanoma.  The goals of this study were to (i) stratify melanoma cell lines by using global gene expression profiling ; (ii) correlate gene expression profiles with invasive potential; and (iii) identify new prognostic markers and therapeutic targets that might aid clinical cancer diagnosis and management.

DESIGN
Two-colour spotted oligonucleotide microarrays were used to measure global gene expression in metastatic melanoma cell lines against a common universal reference. Biological replication was achieved by performing replicate arrays on a subset of randomly selected cell lines, in which the replicate total RNA samples were isolated from different vials of cells at different passage numbers, grown by different researchers, and often in different laboratories. Further, NZM01 and NZM02 were derived from different tumours from the same patient at different surgeries, and NZM07.2 and 07.4 were derived from the NZM07 cell line. The array hybridisations were peformed in three batches. Technical replication was achieved by using intra- and inter-batch replicates with different RNA samples from 6/25 of the cell lines: NZM04, 2 x batch 1, 1 x batch 2; NZM22, 2 x batch 1; NZM40, 1 x batch 1, 1 x batch 2; NZM06, 1 x batch 1, 1 x batch 3; NZM09, 1 x batch 1, 1 x batch 2; NZM15, 1 x batch 2, 1 x batch 3.

PLATFORM
GPL8640 OGF MWG human 20K print-122

CITATIONS
20041153

