TITLE
Global gene expression analysis of waterlogging stressed Cotton root and leaf tissue

ORGANISM
Gossypium hirsutum

SUMMARY
Global gene expression was compared between roots of cotton plants (variety Sicot 71) flooded for 4 hours and roots of unflooded cotton plants. Global gene expression was also compared between leaves of cotton plants (variety Sicot 71) flooded for 24 hours and leaves of unflooded cotton plants. Waterlogging stress causes yield reductions in cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.). A major component of waterlogging stress is the lack of oxygen available to submerged tissues. While changes in expressed protein, gene transcription and metabolite levels have been studied in response to low oxygen stress, little research has been done on molecular responses to waterlogging in cotton. We assessed cotton growth responses to waterlogging and assayed global gene transcription responses in root and leaf cotton tissues of partially submerged plants. Waterlogging causes significant reductions in stem elongation, shoot mass, root mass, and leaf number. At the global gene expression level waterlogging significantly alters the expression of 1012 genes (4.2% of genes assayed) in root tissue as early as 4h after flooding. Many of these genes are associated with cell wall modification and growth pathways, glycolysis, fermentation, mitochondrial electron transport and nitrogen metabolism. Waterlogging of plant roots also altered global leaf gene expression, significantly changing the expression of 1305 genes (5.4% of genes assayed) after 24h of flooding. Genes associated with cell wall growth and modification, tetrapyrrole synthesis, hormone response, starch metabolism and nitrogen metabolism were affected in leaf tissues of waterlogged plants. Implications of these results for the development of waterlogging tolerant cotton are discussed. Keywords: Stress Response

DESIGN
Plants of cotton cultivar Sicot 71 were grown to the two-leaf stage in tubs. For stress treatments plants were either watered as normal or flooded with water to completely submerge the root system. At four and twenty-four hours post-flooding samples of root or leaf tissue were taken from control and flooded plants. Total RNA was extracted from each tissue sample and assayed on cotton Affymetrix chips. Two biological replications were used for each comparison.

PLATFORM
GPL8672 [Cotton] Affymetrix Cotton Genome Array

CITATIONS
19923201

