TITLE
Transcriptional effects of LMP3 in MSC

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Lim Mineralization Protein, splice variant-3 (LMP3) is known to induce osteoblast differentiation as a result of active modulation of selected molecules involved in the osteogenic cascade. LMP3 seems to act as an upstream modulator of osteogenic differentiation, although the complete network of molecular events involved in this process are still largely unknown. In particular, LMP3 seems to act, at least in part, through the upregulation of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) which are known to exert multiple functions, leading to the regulation of diverse cellular processes. Thus, LMP actions inside the cell are likely to involve the activation of main signaling pathways, suggesting a possible wider role of the molecule in cell homeostasis. The aim of this study is to analyze the gene expression profiles exhibited by human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) expressing the LMP3 gene in order to investigate the early transcriptional events preceding the acquisition of a differentiated phenotype. For this purpose, MSCs were transduced using a replication-defective adenoviral vector carrying the human LMP3 gene. Gene expression profiling was then carried out by microarray analysis one day after cell transduction. The results obtained in this study suggest that in addition to activating the TGFB1-signaling pathway, LMP3 acts on the fine balance between proliferation and differentiation of mesenchymal cells. Gene modulation directly related to the reprogramming of the transcriptional machinery induced by the viral vector is also discussed.

DESIGN
For microarray analysis, cells were plated in T75 flasks and transduced with 100 MOI of either AdLMP3 or Adψ5 (mock-transduction), while untransduced cells served as negative controls. The experiment was carried out in three independent replicates, thus an overall number of 9 samples were analyzed.

PLATFORM
GPL201 [HG-Focus] Affymetrix Human HG-Focus Target Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

