TITLE
Expression data from Bronchial Epithelial Cells exposed to Cyclic Stretch with and without LPS or TNFa

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a catastrophic form of acute lung injury (ALI). The necessity for mechanical ventilation (MV) renders patients at risk for ventilator induced lung injury (VILI). Exposure to repetitive cyclic stretch (CS) and/or over-inflation exacerbates injury. Reducing tidal volume (VT) is the only therapeutic strategy shown to mitigate morbidity and mortality. Cyclic stretch has been shown to differentially regulate gene expression in part through the activation of mammalian mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). Although these studies have shown both molecular and cellular alterations, no unifying hypothesis to explain MV-induced lung injury has emerged. In the current study, we hypothesized that coordinated expression of cyclic stretch (CS)-responsive genes relies on the presence of common CS-sensitive regulatory elements. To identify CS-responsive genes, we undertook a comparative examination of the gene expression profile of human bronchial epithelial airway (Beas-2B) cells in response to various injurious stimuli involved in the pathogenesis of acute lung injury (ALI)/Ventilator induced lung injury (VILI): cyclic stretch, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a), and lipopolysaccharide (LPS).

DESIGN
Human Bronchial Epithelial Cells (Beas-B2) cells grown on silicon elastic plates coated with Type I collagen (Flexercell International, McKeesport, PA) were exposed to six regiments for 4 h: 1) control (static, [control]); 2) mechanical stretch (25 PKa, 30 cycles per min, [stretch]); 3) LPS (1 mcg/ml [LPS]); 4) TNF-α (20 ng/ml; [TNF]); 5) mechanical stretch plus LPS [LPS+S], and 6) mechanical stretch plus TNF-α [TNF+S]. Total RNA (duplicate experiments) was extracted using TRIZOL reagent (as per manufactures specifications) and purified using Qiagen mRNA purification Kit (as per manufacturers specifications). mRNA was hybridized to Affymetrix Human U133plus2.0 chips. Probe based analysis, background reduction, and quantile data normalization was performed in MeV 4.0 of TM4 using Robust Multi-array Average (RMA).

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

