TITLE
Clinical score and gene profiling patterns identify Kawasaki disease patients who may benefit from methylprednisolone

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Clinical score and transcript abundance patterns identify Kawasaki disease patients who may benefit from addition of methylprednisolone. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) treatment-resistant patients are high risk of developing coronary artery lesions (CALs) with Kawasaki disease (KD). The IVIG-responsive (Group A; n = 6) and -resistant patients (Group B) were predicted before starting the initial treatment using the Egami scoring system, and randomly allocated a single-IVIG treatment group (Group B1; n = 6) or a IVIG-plus-methylprednisolone (IVMP) combined therapy group (Group B2; n = 5). We investigated transcript abundance in the leukocytes of those patients using microarray analysis. Results: five patients in Group A and 1 patient in Group B1 responded to initial IVIG treatment. All Group B2 patients responded to IVIP-plus-IVMP combined therapy. Prior to performing these treatments, those transcripts related to IVIG-resistance and to the development of CALs, such as IL1R, IL18R, oncostatin M, suppressor of cytokine signaling-3, S100A12 protein, carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule-1, matrix metallopeptidase-9 and polycythemia rubra vera-1 were more abundant in Group B patients in comparison to Group A patients. Moreover, those transcripts in Group B2 patients were more profoundly and broadly suppressed than Group B1 patients after treatment.                                                        Conclusion: this study elucidated the molecular mechanism of the effectiveness of IVIG-plus-IVMP combined therapy.

DESIGN
34 samples of pre- and post-treatment in three groups consisting of predicted as  IVIG-responsive patients,  given single-IVIG treatment patients and IVIG-plus-IVMP combined therapy group in predicted as IVIG-resistant patients. Samples were analyzed without replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19680167

