TITLE
Genome-wide analysis of murine cardiomyocytes at different developmental stages

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Cardiomyocytes exhibit differential growth patterns throughout development. In fetal life the increase in cardiac mass is associated with hyperplastic growth and cardiomyocyte proliferation. The majority of fetal cardiomyocytes are also mononucleated. During the early neonatal period in mice there is a switch from hyperplastic to hypertrophic growth of cardiomyocytes. This period is characterized by bi-nucleation and polyploidization of cardiomyocyte nuclei and a decreased capacity for cardiomyocytes to proliferate and complete cytokinesis. Increases in myocardial mass occur predominantly via hypertrophic growth. Adult mammalian cardiomyocytes are generally accepted to have little or no proliferative capacity and to be terminally withdrawn from the cell cycle. The vast majority of adult murine cardiomyocytes are bi-nucleated. The present study sought to accurately establish the growth pattern of cardiomyocytes throughout development in mice and identify genes associated with the switch from hyperplastic to hypertrophic growth. These cell cycle associated genes are crucial to the understanding of the mechanisms of bi-nucleation, polyploidization and hypertrophy in the neonatal period. Cardiomyocytes were FACS sorted from the hearts of ED11-12 embryos, neonatal day 3-4 and adult (10 week) eGFP ?-MHC mice whereby GFP expression is driven constitutively by the ?-MHC promoter. Gene analyses identified  genes whose expression was predicted to be particular to day 3 -4 neonatal cardiomyocytes, compared to embryonic or adult cells. Cell cycle associated genes are crucial to the understanding of the mechanisms of bi-nucleation and hypertrophy in the neonatal period, and offer attractive candidates for manipulation.

DESIGN
Total RNA obtained from isolated cardiomyocytes from ED11-12; Neonatal day 3-4 and adult timepoints compared with each other. Several hearts per sample, RNA was pooled within samples. FACS samples were prepared in the following manner: embryonic, neonatal and adult hearts were dissected and dissociated to single cell solution with Liberase Blendzyme 3 (0.1 mg/ml) (Roche Diagnostics), washed and spun down and resuspended in cardiomyocyte isolation buffer (130 mM NaCl;  5 mM KCl; 1.2 mM KH2PO4; 6 mM HEPES; 5 mM NaHCO3; 1 mM MgCl2; 5 mM Glucose).

PLATFORM
GPL8833 Lund Strategic Center Mouse Illumina Expression Chip V6.1.1

CITATIONS
20071355

