TITLE
Transcriptional Response of Rhodococcus aetherivorans I24 to Polychlorinated Biphenyl-Contaminated Sediments.

ORGANISM
Rhodococcus aetherivorans

SUMMARY
We analyzed the transcriptional response of the actinomycete Rhodococcus aetherivorans I24 to biphenyl and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). This species has not been extensively exposed to PCBs, as it was first isolated from a toluene contaminated aquifer, rather than a site contaminated with polychlorinated hydrocarbons.  Using a microarray targeting 3524 genes, we assessed gene expression in minimal medium supplemented with various substrates (e.g. PCBs) and in both PCB-contaminated and non-contaminated sediment slurries. Relative to the reference condition (minimal medium supplemented with glucose), 408 genes were up-regulated in the various treatments. In medium and in sediment, PCBs elicited the up-regulation of a common set of 100 genes, including chaperones (groEL), a superoxide dismutase (sodA), alkyl hydroperoxide reductase protein C (ahpC), and a catalase/peroxidase (katG). Analysis of the R. aetherivorans I24 genome sequence identified orthologs of many of the genes in the canonical biphenyl pathway, but very few of these genes were up-regulated in response to PCBs or biphenyl.   This study is one of the first which utilizes microarrays to assess the transcriptional response of a soil bacterium to a pollutant under conditions which more closely resemble the natural environment. Our results indicate that the transcriptional response of R. aetherivorans I24 to PCBs, in both medium and sediment, is primarily directed towards reducing oxidative stress, rather than catabolism. In addition, the identification of numerous genes expressed in contaminated soil specifically may have implications for the development of biosensors. Finally, comparative genomic and transcriptomic analyses suggest that the mere presence of orthologs of the required enzymes may not be sufficient to confer a vigorous biphenyl/PCB metabolism.

DESIGN
RNA was isolated from cells incubated in the following: sediment from a PCB-contaminated industrial site, uncontaminated sediment from a comparable site, and defined media supplemented with glucose (3 g/L), glucose and biphenyl (3 g/L, 4.5 μM), or glucose and PCBs (3 g/L, 5 mg/L Aroclor 1254). In all cases, there were 3 biological replicates and 2 technical replicates (repeat hybridizations). A total of 3524 genes are represented on the arrays; of these, 41 and 176 are found on the plasmids pRA2 and pRA3, respectively. On average, there are 3 distinct 24nt probes per gene.

PLATFORM
GPL8836 Nimblegen-R_aetherivorans_I24-3.5K-v2.0

CITATIONS
20369357

