TITLE
Inducing and Predicting Immune Tolerance After Kidney Transplantation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background Immune tolerance and persistent mixed chimerism can be achieved reproducibly after combined organ and hematopoietic cell transplantation in mice conditioned with total lymphoid irradiation plus anti-thymocyte globulin. We studied the safety and reproducibility of this approach in a cohort of kidney transplant patients, and tried to identify immune monitoring procedures that can predict tolerance and guide complete immunosuppressive drug withdrawal. Methods Ten patients conditioned with 10 doses of total lymphoid irradiation and 5 doses of anti-thymocyte globulin were given kidney transplants and an injection of CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells and T cells from HLA matched donors. Blood cell monitoring included changes in chimerism, balance of T cell subsets, gene expression, and responses to donor alloantigens. Results Nine of 10 patients developed multi-lineage chimerism without graft versus host disease (GVHD), and all had excellent graft function at the last observation point. Five of these with chimerism persisting for at least 12 months were completely withdrawn from immunosuppressive drugs for 6 to 35 months. Blood cells from patients off drugs showed development of specific unresponsiveness to donor alloantigens, “tolerance” profiles on gene microarrays, early high ratios of regulatory versus conventional naïve T cells, and early high levels of chimerism among NK cells. Conclusions Total lymphoid irradiation, and anti-thymocyte globulin promoted the development of persistent chimerism and tolerance in a cohort of patients given kidney transplants and donor cell injections. Assays were identified that can assist in the safe withdrawal of immunosuppressive drugs.

DESIGN
45 Agilent Microarray samples were conducted, including 16 tolerance patients, 10 chronic rejection patients, 5 healthy normal controls, and 7 paired pre and post-transplant induced tolerance patients. The aim is to see whether induced tolerance patients show operational tolerance gene expression signature and can withdraw or minimize the immunosuppression regimens.

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

