TITLE
FRIK966 and FRIK2000 comparison to pooled EDL933 reference

ORGANISM
Escherichia coli

SUMMARY
The existence of two separate lineages of Escherichia coli O157:H7 has previously been reported, and research indicates that  one of these lineages (lineage I) might be more pathogenic towards human hosts. We have previously shown that the more pathogenic lineage expresses higher levels of Shiga toxin 2 (Stx2) than the non-pathogenic lineage II.  To evaluate why lineage 2 isolates do not express appreciable levels of toxin, two lineage 2 isolates (FRIK966 and FRIK2000) were chosen as representatives of lineage 2 and whole genome microarrays were performed using Agilent microarrays using the E. coli O157:H7 EDL933 lineage I clinical type isolate as a reference.  Microarray results were utilized to evaluate what genes and pathways might be missing or differentially expressed.  Quantitative RT-PCR was utilized to validate the microarray data.

DESIGN
Based upon the transcriptome of Escherichia coli O157:H7 EDL933 an oligonucleotide microarray, made up of 60 mers was designed.  A total of 4873 genes in an 8 x 15K Agilent microarray design.  Designed using a custom script, specifications for gene specific oligos were based upon various design characteristics such as temperature of melting, 3’ location, specificity, lack of repeat nucleotides, etc. (Charbonnier et al., 2005).  Arrays were manufactured using Agilent Sure-print technology.  Each array consisted of duplicate elements for each gene randomly distributed with Agilent control elements included. All procedures were performed according to respective manufacturer protocols.  Lineage I and lineage II strains were grown overnight as described, a total of 10e7 cells were washed twice in fresh media, normalized based upon optical density,  inoculated into fresh media, incubated at 37oC shaking 120 x g for 3 hours and then suspended in RNAprotect bacteria reagent (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA.).  Total RNA was extracted using RNeasy Bacteria Mini Kit (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA.) and trace amounts of DNA were removed using RNase-Free DNase Set (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA.).  RNA was quantified using Nanodrop system (NanoDrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE) and quality confirmed by electrophoresis on a Bio-rad Experion system (BioRad XXX).  For each sample, 10 ug of RNA were labeled with either CyDye3-dCTP or CyDye5-dCTP (Perkin Elmer) using the LabelStar kit (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA.) and Random nonamers (Integrated DNA Technologies ).  Labeled cDNA were hybridized to the microarray using Agilent Hi-RPM hybridization solution in an Agilent Hybridization chamber (Agilent.). A total of 8 arrays, each with duplicate elements for each gene, alternating dye swap for each replicate (4 biological replicates), were analyzed to obtain genes that were consistently and differentially regulated in comparison to EDL933, while limiting false discover rate (FDR) below a stringent 5% (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).

