TITLE
Deletion of chromosome 4q predicts outcome in Stage II colon cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Around 30% of all stage II colon cancer patients will relapse and die of their disease. At present no objective parameters for identification of high-risk stage II colon cancer patients, who will benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy, are established. With traditional histopathological features definition of high-risk stage II colon cancer patients is inaccurate. Therefore more objective and robust markers for prediction of relapse are needed. DNA copy number aberrations have proven to be robust prognostic markers, but have not been investigated for this specific group of patients. The aim of the present study is to identify chromosomal aberrations that can predict relapse of tumor in patients with stage II colon cancer. Materials and Methods: DNA was isolated from 40 formaldehyde fixed paraffin embedded stage II colon cancer samples with extensive clinicopathological data. Samples where hybridized using Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) arrays to determine DNA copy number changes and microsatellite stability was determined by PCR. To analyze differences between stage II colon cancer patients with and without relapse of tumor a Wilcoxon rank-sum test was implemented with multiple testing correction Results: Patients with stage II colon cancer who had relapse of disease showed significant more losses on chromosome 4, 5, 15q, 17q and 18q. When microsatellite stable (MSS) patients were analyzed separately, only losses on chromosome 4q22.1-4q35.2 predicted worse outcome in stage II colon cancer patients. No differences in clinicopathological characteristics between patients with and without relapse were observed. Conclusion: Losses on 4q22.1-4q35.2 predict worse outcome in MSS stage II colon cancer patients and may aid in the selection of patients for adjuvant therapy.

DESIGN
40 Stage II colorectal cancer (CRC) tissue samples (FFPE), 16 with and 24 without relapse of tumor

PLATFORM
GPL8841 Agilent-014950 Human Genome CGH Microarray 4x44K (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
21717218

