TITLE
Transcript Profiling of Different CNS Regions in Response to Experimental Restraint Stress on Rats

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
It generally believes that moderate stress could have protective and adaptive effects, but less is known about the moderate or experimental stress on CNS in stimulated animals. This study aims to investigate the potential gene expression in nociception-related central regions induced by moderate experimental stress in rats. Rats were given moderate restrain for 50 min and using cDNA microarrays to compare different gene expression in central regions. Transcriptome profiling analysis showed that stress-related genes at acute stage were up-regulated in Arc; rhythmic process-related genes were up-regulated in PAG, while glutamine metabolism-, arginine metabolis-related genes were up-regulated in DH. At late stage, immune related genes were broadly up-regulated in the CNS regions. These results suggest that specific GO categories? genes could be regulated in the specific CNS regions correlated with relative function in response to external stimuli at the beginning period. It also suggest that moderate stress could enhance neuroendocrine and immune function in broad CNS regions at late stage, and experimental stress should be careful considered, especially in neuroendocrine and immune studies. Furthermore, Sgk1 was verified by qRT-PCR and western blot. The significant up regulation implied Sgk1 in the CNS may play an important role in the response to stress. Keywords: Transcriptome analysis

DESIGN
Rats were exposed to moderate restrain for 50 min and nociceptive testing and returned to home cages for 1 hours or 24 hours before sacrificed, termed as restrain_nociceptive_test_group 1 (RT1) and restrain_nociceptive_test_group 24 (RT24) respectively. Subsequently analyzed their nociception-related central regions transcript profile using cDNA microarrays, the rats were without receiving restraint stress and nociceptive testing as control. The tissue of arcuate nucleus (Arc), periaqueductal gray (PAG) and dorsal horn (DH) of the fifth and sixth lumbar (L5 and L6) of five rats were selected for transcript analysis in each group. The five control rats were mixed and labeled with cy5 according to different CNS regions, each RT1 or RT24 rats were labeled with cy3.

PLATFORM
GPL3498 SBC Rat cDNA Microarray ver2.0

CITATIONS
20218974

