TITLE
Human 32 MPSS samples

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
This series represents a very deep survey of all transcripts expressed in a wide range of human tissues and cells by Massively Parallel Signature Sequencing (MPSS). These datasets have been generated and donated to the scientific community by Lynx Therapeutics, Inc in Hayward, CA. The data contained in this submission is described in the following publication: 'C. Victor Jongeneel, Mauro Delorenzi, Christian Iseli, Daixing Zhou, Christian D. Haudenschild, Brian J. Stevenson, Robert L. Strausberg, Andrew J.G. Simpson, and Thomas J. Vasicek.' An atlas of human gene expression from massively parallel signature sequencing (MPSS). Genome Research VolXX 2004 Abstract of the publication: 'We have used massively parallel signature sequencing (MPSS) to sample the transcriptomes of 32 normal human tissues to an unprecedented depth, thus documenting the patterns of expression of over 20,000 genes with high sensitivity and specificity. The data confirm the widely held belief that differences between cell and tissue types are largely determined by the expression of a limited number of tissue-specific genes, rather than by combinations of more promiscuously expressed genes. Expression of a little over half of all known human genes seems to account for both the common requirements and the specific functions of the tissues sampled. A classification of tissues based on patterns of gene expression largely reproduces classifications based on anatomical and biochemical properties. The unbiased sampling of the human transcriptome achieved by MPSS supports the notion that most human genes have been mapped, if not functionally characterised. This dataset should prove useful for the identification of tissue-specific genes, for the study of global changes induced by pathological conditions, and for the definition of a minimal set of genes necessary for basic cell maintenance.' Keywords: other

PLATFORM
GPL1443 Massively Parallel Signature Sequencing - MPSS (classic method)

CITATIONS
15998913

