TITLE
Estradiol or Testosterone treated efferent duct and caput epididymis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The role of estrogen and testosterone in the regulation of gene expression in the proximal reproductive tract is not completely understood.  To address this question, mice were treated with testosterone or estradiol and RNA from the efferent ducts and caput epididymis was processed and hybridized to Affymetrix MOE 430 2.0 microarrays.  Analysis of array output identified probe sets in each tissue with altered levels in hormone treated versus control animals.  Hormone treatment efficacy was confirmed by determination of serum hormone levels pre- and post-treatment and observed changes in transcript levels of previously reported hormone-responsive genes.  Tissue-specific hormone sensitivity was observed with 2867 and 3197 probe sets changing significantly in the efferent ducts after estrogen and testosterone treatment, respectively.  In the caput epididymis, 117 and 268 probe sets changed after estrogen and testosterone treatment, respectively, demonstrating a greater response to hormone in the efferent ducts than the caput epididymis. Transcripts sharing similar profiles in the intact and hormone-treated animals compared with castrated controls were also identified. Ontological analysis of probe sets revealed a significant number of hormone-regulated transcripts encode proteins associated with lipid metabolism, transcription and steroid metabolism in both tissues.  Real-time RT-PCR was employed to confirm array data and investigate other potential hormone-responsive regulators of proximal reproductive tract function.  The results of this work reveal previously unknown responses to estrogen in the caput epididymis and to testosterone in the efferent ducts as well as tissue specific hormone sensitivity in the proximal reproductive tract.

DESIGN
Adult animals were castrated or sham-castrated, allowed to recover for 14 days, and then treated with 0.015 mg estradiol (castrated), 0.015 mg testosterone propionate (castrated), or vehicle (castrated and sham-castrated as biological controls) in duplicate.  Efferent duct and caput epididymis was collected from each sample and analyzed.  Duplicates are included in the provided data and numbered 1 or 2 for each treatment regimen.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19553595

