TITLE
Comparative global transcriptomic profiling of human ES and iPSs cells and their derived microdissected cardiac clusters

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Recent establishment of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells opened new avenues for generating human patient-specific stem cell derivatives that can be used for in vitro modeling of human disease, drug development and cell replacement therapy. In this study we analyzed the molecular and functional properties of cardiomyocytes (CM) differentiated from human iPS cells. Clusters of synchronously beating cells were first observed at day 11 of iPS cell differentiation. Beating clusters that were microdissected at day 18 of differentiation expressed high levels of cardiospecific transcripts NKx2.5, alpha-MHC, MLC2v, alpha-actinin and troponin T. Immunocytochemical stainings  for alpha-actinin and troponin T revealed cross-striations typical of CM. Functional assessment of iPS cell-derived CM showed that these cells possess intact calcium transients and respond to beta-adrenergic and muscarinic stimulation. Molecular, structural and electrophysiological properties of iPS cell-derived CMs were highly comparable to their human ES cell-derived counterparts at the same differentiation stage. Comparison of global gene expression profiles of human ES and iPS cells and the corresponding microdissected beating areas further confirmed their similarity. We conclude that human iPS cells can differentiate into functional CM, which are indistinguishable from human ES cell-derived CMs and may fulfill the basic requirement for their use in disease modeling, drug screening and future therapeutic applications.

DESIGN
Six different experimental groups were included into analysis: undifferentiated human ES cells (1) and undifferentiated human iPS cells (2), human ES cell-derived cardiomyocytes (3) and human iPS cell-derived cardiomyocytes (4) enriched by microdissection of spontaneously contracting embryoid body outgrowths, and human fetal (5) and adult (6) heart tissue. Total RNA samples were prepared from three independent biological replicates in groups 1-4. In groups 5 and 6, single RNA probes were analyzed as three technical replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL6947 Illumina HumanHT-12 V3.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
20843318

