TITLE
Specific and pleiotropic patterns of mRNA regulation by ArcZ

ORGANISM
Salmonella enterica

SUMMARY
The small RNA, ArcZ (previously RyhA/SraH), was discovered in several genome-wide screens in Escherichia coli and Salmonella. Its high degree of genomic conservation, its frequent recovery by shotgun sequencing, and its association with the RNA chaperone, Hfq, identified ArcZ as an abundant enterobacterial “core” small RNA of unknown function. Here, we report that ArcZ acts as a post-transcriptional regulator in Salmonella, repressing the mRNAs of the widely distributed sdaCB (serine uptake) and tpx (oxidative stress) genes, and of STM3216, a horizontally acquired methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein (MCP). Both sdaCB and STM3216 are regulated by sequestration of the ribosome binding site. In contrast, the tpx mRNA is targeted in the coding sequence (CDS), arguing that CDS targeting is more common than appreciated. Transcriptomic analysis of an arcZ deletion strain further argued for the existence of a distinct set of Salmonella loci specifically regulated by ArcZ. In contrast, increased expression of the sRNA altered the steady-state levels of > 16% (≥750) of all Salmonella mRNAs, and rendered the bacteria non-motile. Deep sequencing detected a dramatically changed profile of Hfq-bound sRNAs and mRNAs suggesting that the unprecedented degree of pleiotropic regulation might in part be caused by titration of Hfq binding by ArcZ.

DESIGN
This study used three different approaches to identify target genes and biological role of the small RNA ArcZ in Salmonella Typhimurium. Transcriptomic analysis of ArcZ overexpression: Strain JVS-0082 (ΔarcZ) was transformed with plasmids pJV300 (control) and pKP48-1 (parcZ), and grown in liquid culture (LB broth) inoculated 1:100 from an overnight culture for 6h after cells had reached an OD600=2.0 to attain late stationary phase. Transcriptomic analysis of arcZ mutant strain: Strains JVS-007 (WT) and JVS-0082 (ΔarcZ) were transformed with plasmid pJV300 (control) and grown in liquid culture (LB broth) inoculated 1:100 from an overnight culture for 6h after cells had reached an OD600=2.0 to attain late stationary phase. Transcriptional effects of ArcZ pulse expression: Strain SL1344 was transformed with plasmids pKP8-35 (pBAD-control) and pKP4-13 (pBAD-ArcZ), and grown in liquid culture (LB broth) inoculated 1:100 from an overnight culture to an OD600 of 1.5. Expression of the insert was induced with L-arabinose (0.2% final concentrations) for 10 min. Three biological replicates were performed for each strain/condition.

