TITLE
Gene expression-based assessment of the effect of PQQ

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ) is a naturally occurring compound and known to improve growth and reproductive performance when added to diets of PQQ-deprived rodents. To understand its mechanism of action, changes in hepatic gene expression were measured in rats fed diets with or without added PQQ.  Of the ~10,000 genes and ESTs analyzed, 4.7% of the transcripts were sensitive to changes in PQQ dietary status.  PQQ deprivation generally caused downregulation of genes associated with mitochondriogenesis, cell differentiation, and immune function.  These gene expression changes provide the basis for most of the previously published functional observations associated with PQQ deficiency and PQQ administered in pharmacological amounts. To assess PQQ’s potential functions, we used gene expression profiling through microarray technology as part of a comprehensive approach to identify potential pathways and mechanisms.  Given that the systemic effects of PQQ deprivation are influenced at levels of dietary intake in the micromolar range, highly purified diets were used to reduce expression from other bioactive factors and xenobiotics, such as those found in typical rodent chow diets. Dietary conditions were also chosen to clarify the response to PQQ deprivation.  A goal was to determine if specific changes in dietary protocol or patterns could be used to identify genes important to the function of PQQ.  Because it has been observed that mitochondrial-related functions are influenced by PQQ, we hypothesized that changes in genes important to fatty acid and amino acid metabolism and mitochondrial function would be likewise affected by dietary levels of PQQ. The overall study was carried out using two experiments. In this specific experiment, PQQ depletion and repletion was studied to understand the effect of PQQ on gene expression.

DESIGN
In this experiment, a CodeLink® UniSet Rat I Bioarray was used. Unpooled RNA samples were hybridized to the UniSet arrays, hence expression profiles were obtained from individual rats for each of the 5 groups.

PLATFORM
GPL2890 GE Healthcare/Amersham Biosciences CodeLink™   UniSet Rat I Bioarray

CITATIONS
20491655

