TITLE
Polysomal and Cytoplasmic RNA of U937 cells before and after PMA stimulation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Human histomonocytic U937 cells exhibit macrophage-like properties after phorbol ester stimulation.  Accumulating evidence demonstrated that remarkable number of transcripts changed in their amount at total RNA levels.  However, post-transcriptional regulation has not been fully elucidated in this model.  Thus, we compared expression profiles between polysomal and cytoplasmic RNAs before and after phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate stimulation (48h, 32nM). Table 1: Detailed description of the expression data of human histomonocytic cell line U937 cells.  Data of total cytoplasmic and polysomal fractions before and after PMA stimulation is shown.  This table contains all spot data except: 1) saturated spots, 2) undetectable spots, 3) stained spots, and 4) spots only detected in less than one samples. Column A: Gene symbol (“I_xxxxxx” is corresponding to EST clones) Column B: Genbank accession no. Column C: Description Column D: Average value of expression levels in total cytoplasmic fraction in the absence of PMA Column E: Average value of expression levels in total cytoplasmic fraction in the presence of PMA (32nM, 48h) Column F: Average value of expression levels in polysomal fraction in the absence of PMA Column G: Average value of expression levels in polysomal fraction in the presence of PMA Column H: Expression ratio of polysome, PMA (-) to cytoplasm, PMA(-) Column I: Expression ratio of polysome, PMA (+) to cytoplasm, PMA(+) Column J: Expression ratio of cytoplasm, PMA (+) to cytoplasm, PMA(-) Column K: Expression ratio of polysome, PMA (+) to polysome, PMA(-) Column L: Different expression between polysome, PMA (-) and cytoplasm, PMA(-): different=1 Column M: Different expression between polysome, PMA (+) and cytoplasm, PMA(+): different=1 Column N: Different expression between cytoplasm, PMA (+) and cytoplasm, PMA(-): different=1 Column O: Different expression between polysome, PMA (+) and polysome, PMA(-): different=1 Table 2:  Candidates post-transcriptionally regulated by PMA.  We extracted 105 transcripts whose expression levels were altered only in either fraction accompanied by changes in polysome/cytoplasm expression ratio. Column A: Gene symbol (“I_xxxxxx” is corresponding to EST clones) Column B: Genbank accession no. Column C: Description Column D: Average value of expression levels in total cytoplasmic fraction in the absence of PMA Column E Average value of expression levels in total cytoplasmic fraction in the presence of PMA Column F: Average value of expression levels in polysomal fraction in the absence of PMA Column G: Average value of expression levels in polysomal fraction in the presence of PMA Column H: Expression ratio of polysome, PMA (-) to cytoplasm, PMA(-) Column I: Expression ratio of polysome, PMA (+) to cytoplasm, PMA(+) Column J: Expression ratio of cytoplasm, PMA (+) to cytoplasm, PMA(-) Column K: Expression ratio of polysome, PMA (+) to polysome, PMA(-) Keywords = phorbol ester Keywords = macrophage Keywords = polysome Keywords = post-transcriptional regulation Keywords: parallel sample

PLATFORM
GPL885 Agilent-011521 Human 1A Microarray G4110A  (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
15581638

