TITLE
Gene expression in nontumoral liver tissue and recurrence-free survival in hepatitis C virus-positive HCC

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background/Aims: Recurrence-free survival (RFS) following curative resection of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in subjects with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is highly variable. Traditional clinico-pathological endpoints are recognized as weak predictors of RFS. It has been suggested that gene expression profiling of HCC and nontumoral liver tissue may improve prediction of RFS, aid in understanding of the underlying liver disease, and guide individualized therapy. The goal of this study was to create a gene expression predictor of HCC recurrence in subjects with HCV. Methods: Frozen samples of the tumors and nontumoral liver were obtained from 47 subjects with HCV-associated HCC. Additional nontumoral liver samples were obtained from HCV-free subjects with metastatic liver tumors. Gene expression profiling data was used to determine the molecular signature of HCV-associated HCC and to develop a predictor of RFS. Results: The molecular profile of the HCV-associated HCC confirmed central roles for MYC and TGF-beta1 in liver tumor development. Gene expression in tumors was found to have poor predictive power with regards to RFS, but analysis of nontumoral tissues yielded a strong predictor for RFS in late-recurring ( > 1 year) subjects. Importantly, nontumoral tissue-derived gene expression predictor of RFS was highly significant in both univariable and multivariable Cox proportional hazard model analyses. Conclusions: Microarray analysis of the nontumoral tissues from subjects with HCV-associated HCC delivers novel molecular signatures of RFS, especially among the late-recurrence subjects. The gene expression signature of the predictor gives important insights into the pathobiology of HCC recurrence and used in design of the individualized therapy.

DESIGN
43 tumor (JT) and 44 non-tumor (JNT) liver tissues surgically resected from patients with HCV-associated hepatocellular carcinoma; 8 non-tumor liver tissues (control samples, JC) surgically resected from HCV- or HBV-free patients with metastatic liver tumor. Inter-batch normalization was carried out using Distance Weighted Discrimination procedure. The supplementary file 'GSE17856_Readme.txt' contains a description of the replicates used for normalization. The 'GSE17856_US14702406_2514850*' files are the raw data files for the replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
20380719

