TITLE
Transcriptional profile in low to high-level macrolide resistant C. jejuni strain selected from NCTC 11168

ORGANISM
Campylobacter jejuni

SUMMARY
Campylobacter, a major foodborne pathogen, is increasingly resistant to macrolide antibibotics. Previous findings suggeted that development of macrolide resistance in campylobacter requires a multi-step process, but the molecular mechanisms involved in the process are not known. In our study, multiple series of macrolide-resistant C. jejuni mutants were selected in vitro by stepwise exposure of C. jejuni NCTC11168 to increasing concentrations of erythromycin and tylosin. A set of the selected resistance were subjected to microarray and the the global transcriptional profile was analyzed. In this sery, DNA microarray was used to compare the gene expression profiles of  macrolide resistant strains (68E1, 68E8 and 68E64) with its parent wild-type strain NCTC11168. The assay identified a small number of genes that showed significant changes (q-value < 0.1)  in expression in the low-level macrolide resistant strain 68E1, while a large number of gene showing significant changes in intermedia-level resistant stran 68E8 and high-level resistant strain 68 E64. The up-regulated genes in the resistant strains are involved in miscellaneous periplasmic proteins, efflux protienand putative aminotransferase, while the majority of the down-regulated genes  are involved in electron transport,lipoprotein, heat shock protein and unknown function proteins. These findings suggest that there is not much change in low-level macrolide resistant C. jejuni strain. The over-expression of efflux pump and periplasmic protein was involved in the development of resistance to macrolide in C. jejuni. Keywords: macrolide resistant C. jejuni selected from NCTC 11168 step-wise selection.

DESIGN
The design utilized an available two color microarray slide for the entire transcriptome of Campylobacter jejuni. Four hybridizations were performed each with independently extracted samples of either macrolide susceptible C. jejuni NCTC11168 cDNA samples or macrolide resistant C.jejuni cDNA samples. A dye swap was utilized to help minimize dye dependent bias. Thus, there were four biological replicates of each sample.

