TITLE
Transcriptional profile in the macrolide resistant C. jejuni strains selected from 81-176

ORGANISM
Campylobacter

SUMMARY
Campylobacter, a major foodborne pathogen, is increasingly resistant to macrolide antibibotics. previous findings suggeted that development of macrolide resistance in campylobacter requires a multi-step process, but the molecular mechanisms involved in the process are not known. In our study, multiple seriess of macrolide-resistant C. jejuni mutants were selected in vitro by stepwise exposure of C. jejuni 81-176 to increasing concentrations of erythromycin and tylosin. A set of the selected resistance were subjected to microarray and the the global transcriptional profile was analyzed. In this sery, DNA microarray was used to compare the gene expression profiles of  macrolide resistant strains (76E2, 76E8 and 76E64) with its parent wild-type strain C. jejuni 81-176. This assay identified a large number of genes that showed > 1.5 fold changes (q-value < 0.1)  in expression in the  macrolide resistant strains. The up-regulated genes are involved in surface structure,ribosomal, heat shock and some specific Misc memerbrane , while the majority of the down-regulated genes are involved in energy metabolism, amino acid biosynthesis. The over-expression of genes involved in surface structure and Misc memerbrance  was associated with the development of intermedial-level resistance to macrolide in campylobacter 81-176. Keywords:intermedial-level macrolide resistant C. jejuni selected from C. jejuni 81-176. step-wise selection.

DESIGN
The design utilized an available two color microarray slide for the entire transcriptome of Campylobacter jejuni. Four hybridizations were performed each with independently extracted samples of either macrolide susceptible C. jejuni 81-176 cDNA samples or macrolide resistant C. jejuni cDNA samples. A dye swap was utilized to help minimize dye dependent bias. Thus there were three to four biological replicates of each sample.

PLATFORM
GPL9123 JCVI PFGRC Campylobacter jejuni v2 array designed primarily based on strain 81-176 [full array]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

