TITLE
Genome-Wide Expression Profiling Deciphers Host Responses Altered during Dengue Shock Syndrome and Reveals the Role of Innate Immunity in Severe Dengue

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background Deciphering host responses contributing to dengue shock syndrome (DSS), the life-threatening form of acute viral dengue infections, is required to improve both the differential prognosis and the treatments provided to DSS patients, a challenge for clinicians. Methodology/Principal Findings Based on a prospective study, we analyzed the genome-wide expression profiles of whole blood cells from 48 matched Cambodian children: 19 progressed to DSS while 16 and 13 presented respectively classical dengue fever (DF) or dengue hemorrhagic fever grades I/II (DHF). Using multi-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and adjustment of p-values to control the False Discovery Rate (FDR < 10%), we identified a signature of 2959 genes differentiating DSS patients from both DF and DHF, and showed a strong association of this DSS-gene signature with the dengue disease phenotype. Using a combined approach to analyse the molecular patterns associated with the DSS-gene signature, we provide an integrative overview of the transcriptional responses altered in DSS children. In particular, we show that the transcriptome of DSS children blood cells is characterized by a decreased abundance of transcripts related to T and NK lymphocyte responses and by an increased abundance of anti-inflammatory and repair/remodeling transcripts. We also show that unexpected pro-inflammatory gene patterns at the interface between innate immunity, inflammation and host lipid metabolism, known to play pathogenic roles in acute and chronic inflammatory diseases associated with systemic vascular dysfunction, are transcriptionnally active in the blood cells of DSS children. Conclusions/Significance We provide a global while non exhaustive overview of the molecular mechanisms altered in of DSS children and suggest how they may interact to lead to final vascular homeostasis breakdown. We suggest that some mechanisms identified should be considered putative therapeutic targets or biomarkers of progression to DSS.

DESIGN
Whole blood genome-wide expression profiles of Cambodian children (3-15 year old) infected with dengue virus, having different clinical outcomes were compared. The studied cohort included 16 acute dengue fever samples, 13 acute dengue hemorrhagic fever samples and 19 acute dengue shock syndrome samples, classified according to the 1997 WHO criteria and randomised for age, gender, viral serotype and day of blood sampling after onset of fever. Microarray data were normalised using the quantile method. Multi-way ANOVA was used to compared the three clinical groups, at several False Discovery Rate of 10. Unsupervised Hierarchical Clustering (TreeView) showed that DSS patients clustered together (17 out of 19), identifying a gene-signature of DSS. Bio-informatics-based analysis using the demonstration version 7.1 of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (IPA; Ingenuity Systems, www.ingenuity.com) associated with manual and litterature-based analysis was carried out to identify the most relevant functional processes associated with the identified DSS gene expression profile. This was done by combining most informative canonical pathways identified using IPA, genes having the strongest association with the disease phenotype based on ANOVA analysis, and similarities to molecular patterns altered in other systemic inflammatory processes associated with endothelial dysfunction.

