TITLE
Expression profiles of four hematopoietic cell types isolated from the bone marrow of BXD recombinant inbred mice.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Genetical genomics is a strategy for mapping gene expression variation to expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs). We performed a genetical genomics experiment in four functionally distinct but developmentally closely related hematopoietic cell populations isolated from the BXD panel of recombinant inbred mouse strains. This analysis allowed us to analyze eQTL robustness/sensitivity across different cellular differentiation states. Although we identified a large number (365) of “static” eQTLs that were consistently active in all four cell types, we found a much larger number (1283) of “dynamic” eQTLs showing cell-type-dependence. Of these, 140, 45, 531, and 295 were preferentially active in stem, progenitor, erythroid and myeloid cells, respectively. A detailed investigation of those dynamic eQTLs showed that in many cases the eQTL specificity was associated with expression changes in the target gene. We found no evidence for target genes that were regulated by distinct eQTLs in different cell types, suggesting that large-scale changes within functional regulatory networks are uncommon. Our results demonstrate that heritable differences in gene expression are highly sensitive to the developmental stage of the cell population under study. Therefore, future genetical genomics studies should aim at studying multiple well-defined and highly-purified cell types in order to construct as comprehensive a picture of the changing functional regulatory relationships as possible.

DESIGN
These data consist of total mRNA obtained from purified Lin-Sca-1+c-Kit+ multi-lineage cells, committed Lin-Sca-1-c-Kit+ progenitor cells, erythroid TER-119+ cells, and myeloid Gr-1+ cells, isolated from the bone marrow of ~25 genetically related and fully genotyped BXD – C57BL/6 (B6) X DBA/2 (D2) – recombinant inbred mouse strains (female) in three batches. Samples were assayed in three batches which are labeled in the metadata provided here. Some BXD lines have biological replicates, they are designated with letters (e.g. BXD28a and BXD28b are biological replicates). For some mice, not all four cell populations could be assayed. There are also a few technical replicates (see description column).

PLATFORM
GPL6238 mouse-6 v1.1 (Illumina)

CITATIONS
19834560

