TITLE
Recurrent rearrangement during adaptive evolution in an interspecific yeast hybrid suggests a model for rapid introgression

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
Genome rearrangements are associated with eukaryotic evolutionary processes ranging from tumorigenesis to speciation.  Such rearrangements are especially common following the shock of interspecific hybridization, and some of these could be expected to have strong selective value.  To test this expectation we created de novo interspecific yeast hybrids between two diverged but largely syntenic species, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and S. uvarum, then experimentally evolved them under continuous ammonium limitation.  We discovered that a characteristic interspecific genome rearrangement arose multiple times in independently evolved populations.  We uncovered nine different breakpoints, all occurring in a ~1 kb region of chromosome 14, and all producing an “interspecific fusion junction” within the MEP2 gene coding sequence, such that the 5’ portion derives from S. cerevisiae and the 3’ portion derives from S. uvarum.  In most cases the rearrangements altered both chromosomes, resulting in what can be considered to be an introgression of a several-kb region of S. uvarum into an otherwise intact S. cerevisiae chromosome 14, while the S. uvarum chromosome 14 experienced an interspecific reciprocal translocation at the same breakpoint within MEP2, yielding a chimaeric chromosome.  The net result is the presence in the cell of two MEP2 fusion genes having identical breakpoints.  Given that MEP2 encodes for a high-affinity ammonium permease, that MEP2 fusion genes arise repeatedly under ammonium-limitation, and that three independent evolved isolates carrying MEP2 fusion genes are each more fit than their common ancestor, the novel MEP2 fusion genes are very likely adaptive under ammonium limitation.  Our results suggest that when homoploid hybrids form, the admixture of two genomes enables swift and otherwise unlikely evolutionary innovations.  Furthermore, the architecture of the MEP2 rearrangement suggests a model for rapid introgression, a phenomenon seen in numerous eukaryotic phyla, that does not invoke repeated backcrossing to one of the parental species. Nomenclature: GSY86 TimeZeroInoculum = ancestral interspecific hybrid used to inoculate ammonium-limited chemostats into 3 replicate vessels A, B, C. 150gen = various single-clone isolates from 150 generations of evolutions from vessels A, B or C. 200gen = various isolates from 200 generations of evolutions from vessels A, B or C.

DESIGN
Logical Set: Set of arrays organized by shared biological context, such as organism, tumors types, processes, etc.

PLATFORM
GPL9174 SMD Print_1181 (Saccharomyces bayanus and Saccharomyces cerevisiae) GPL9175 SMD Print_1600 (Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces bayanus)

CITATIONS
23555283

