TITLE
Response of Henle 407 cells during Toxoplasma gondii infection

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The innate immune response of mucosal epithelial cells during pathogen invasion plays a central role in immune regulation in the gut.   Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii) is a protozoan intracellular parasite that is usually transmitted through oral infection. Although much of the information on immunity to T. gondii has come from intra-peritoneal infection models, more recent studies have revealed the importance of studying immunity following infection through the natural per-oral route. Oral infection studies have identified many of the key players in the intestinal response; however, they have relied on responses detected days to weeks following infection. Much less is known about how the gut epithelial layer senses and reacts during initial contact with the pathogen. Given the importance of epithelial cells during pathogen invasion, this study uses an in vitro approach to isolate the key players and examine the early response of intestinal epithelial cells during infection by T. gondii. We show that human intestinal epithelial cells infected with T. gondii elicit rapid MAPK phosphorylation, NF-κB nuclear translocation, and secretion of interleukin (IL)-8.   Both ERK1/2 activation and IL-8 secretion responses were shown to be MyD88 dependent and TLR2 was identified to be involved in the recognition of the parasite regardless of the parasite genotype.  Furthermore, we were able to identify additional T. gondii-regulated genes in the infected cells using a pathway-focused array.  Together, our findings suggest that intestinal epithelial cells were able to recognize T. gondii during infection, and the outcome is important for modulating intestinal immune responses.

DESIGN
Oral infection studies have demonstrated an increase in several cytokines and chemokines in response to T.gondii infection; however, the mixed population of the intestinal mucosa did not allow for the determination of the relative role that specific cell populations play in the production of these mediators.  To address the role of intestinal epithelial cells to modulate the cytokine environment early following infection, we used specific pathway arrays to identify cytokines and chemokines induced 4 hours after exposure to T. gondii.  At this time point most cells have become infected, but the parasites have not replicated.

PLATFORM
GPL9116 Oligo GEArray Human Inflammatory Cytokines & Receptors Microarray

CITATIONS
19917706

