TITLE
Human-specific transcriptional regulation of CNS development genes by FOXP2

ORGANISM
Pan troglodytes ; Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The signaling pathways orchestrating both the evolution and development of language in the human brain remain unknown.  To date, the transcription factor FOXP2 is the only gene implicated in Mendelian forms of human speech and language dysfunction1,2.  It has been proposed, that the amino acid composition in the human variant of FOXP2 has undergone accelerated evolution, and this change occurred around the time of language emergence in humans3,4.  However, this remains controversial, and whether the acquisition of these amino acids in human FOXP2 has any functional consequence in human neurons remains untested.  Here, we demonstrate that these two amino acids confer new functionality in terms of differential transcriptional regulation, and extend these observations to in vivo brain, showing that several of the differential FOXP2 targets significantly overlap with genes different between human and chimpanzee brain.  We also identify novel relationships among the differentially expressed genes with additional critical regulators of neuronal development. These data provide support for the functional relevance of changes that occur on the human lineage by showing that the two amino acids unique to human FOXP2 can lead to significant differences in gene expression patterns across brain evolution, with direct consequences for human brain development and disease.  Since FOXP2 has an important role in the use of language in humans, the identified targets may have a critical function in the development and evolution of language circuitry in humans.

DESIGN
This study contains 2 microarray studies. One study is in SH-SY5Y cells, and contained cells of three different genotypes:  control cells, cells overexpressing human FOXP2, and cells overexpressing chimpanzee FOXP2.  Three independent lines of each genotype were used and four biological replicates of each, for a total of 12 arrays per genotype (36 arrays total). The second study is a comparison of human and chimpanzee brain in three brain regions:  frontal pole, caudate nucleus, and hippocampus.  Tissue from 3-6 individuals was utilized for each brain region for each species.

PLATFORM
GPL5104 Sentrix HumanRef-8 v2 Expression BeadChip GPL6883 Illumina HumanRef-8 v3.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
19907493

