TITLE
Array comparative genomic hybridization analysis of flat epithelial atypia (DIN1a) and lobular intraepithelial neoplasia

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Low grade flat ductal intraepithelial neoplasia (DIN1a, flat epithelial atypia) is one of the earliest morphologically recognizable neoplastic lesions of the breast. Frequently, it occurs in association with lobular intraepithelial neoplasia (LIN). The aim of this study was to elucidate chromosomal aberrations in these early neoplastic breast lesions using array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) analysis. Laser capture microdissection of 12 archival formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens harbouring both foci of DIN1a as well as LIN was performed. All analyzed cases of DIN1a and LIN showed chromosomal gains and losses. The aberration encountered most often was loss on 16q in 7 DIN1a (70%) and 10 LIN (91%) cases. Regarding changes in chromosome 1, four DIN1a (40%) and 7 LIN (64%) cases showed a gain on 1q. The results of our study show concurrent chromosomal aberrations of 1q gains and 16q losses in several cases with coexisting LIN and low grade flat DIN. These aberrations are known to be common in low grade invasive ductal carcinomas as well as more advanced (conventional) types of low grade DIN (low grade ductal carcinoma in-situ). Our results raise the possibility of similar molecular-genetic pathways in most of the cases with coexisting LIN and low grade flat DIN.

DESIGN
In this study, 11 cases of classic lobular intraepithelial neoplasias and 10 cases with several areas of low grade flat DIN (DIN1a or flat epithelial atypia) were analyzed by array CGH. Sections of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens cut at 7-8µm were mounted on special foil-coated slides (Molecular Devices, San Diego, USA). The sections were then deparaffinized with Xylene, processed in decreasing concentrations of ethanol and stained with haematoxylin. Lasercapture microdissection for both lesions was performed at multiple sites using Veritas Arcturus. For reference-DNA, female mammary tissue without histomorphological changes obtained from reduction mammoplasty specimens was procecessed and laser-microdissected as explained above. Cells were digested in 10µl TE, pH 9, and 0.5µl proteinase K (20mg/ml) for 48h at 55°C. After inactivation of proteinase K at 99°C for 10min, the digest was stored at -20°C. Without any further purification, the complete digest was used for whole genome amplification by means of the WGA (Whole Genome Amplification) kit from Sigma following the manufacturer’s recommendations. Array CGH was performed as described previously. In brief, two µg of amplified tumor and reference DNA were labelled by random priming (BioPrime® Total Genomic Labeling System, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) with Alexa Fluor® 3 and Alexa Fluor® 5, respectively, and hybridized onto a tiling path BAC array, consisting of the human 32k BAC Re-Array Set (BACPAC Resources Center; DNA kindly provided by Pieter de Jong) and a 1Mb Resolution BAC set (clones kindly provided by Nigel Carter, Wellcome Trust Sanger Centre). All protocols are provided in detail on our website ( ) and more information concerning this platform have been submitted to the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO; GPL5114). For the analysis and visualization of array CGH data, our software-package CGH-PRO was employed. No background subtraction was applied. Raw data were normalized by “Subgrid LOWESS”. For the assessment of copy number gains and losses, we used circular binary segmentation in combination with log2 ratio thresholds of 0.15 and -0.15, respectively.

