TITLE
Gene expression changes induced by the human aristolochic acid I in renal and hepatic tissue of mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Aristolochic acid (AA) is the causative agent of urothelial tumours associated with aristolochic acid nephropathy and is also implicated in the development of Balkan endemic nephropathy-associated urothelial tumours. These tumours contain AA-characteristic TP53 mutations. We examined gene expression changes in Hupki (human TP53 knock-in) mice after treatment with aristolochic acid I (AAI) by gavage (5 mg/kg body weight). After 3, 12 and 21 days of treatment gene expression profiles were investigated using Agilent Whole Mouse 44K Genome Oligo Array. Expression profiles were significantly altered by AAI treatment in both target (kidney) and non-target (liver) tissue. Renal pathology and DNA adduct analysis confirmed kidney as the target tissue of AAI-induced toxicity. Gene ontology for functional analysis revealed that processes related to apoptosis, cell cycle, stress response, immune system, inflammatory response and kidney development were altered in kidney. Canonical pathway analysis indicated Nfkb, aryl hydrocarbon receptor, Tp53 and cell cycle signalling as the most important pathways modulated in kidney. Expression of Nfkb1 and other Nfkb-target genes was confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) and was consistent with the induction of Nfkb1 protein. Myc oncogene, frequently over-expressed in urothelial tumours, was up-regulated by AAI on the microarrays and confirmed by qRT-PCR and protein induction. Collectively we found that microarray gene expression analysis is a useful tool to define tissue-specific responses in AAI-induced toxicity. Several genes identified such as TP53, Rb1, Mdm2, Cdkn2a and Myc are frequently affected in human urothelial cancer, and may be valuable prognostic markers in future clinical studies. Keywords: Carcinogen treatment

DESIGN
Two-color Agilent array. A reference design was chosen that all samples were hybridised to universal mouse reference RNA (UMRR). 12-condition experiment (2 mouse organs: kidney and liver; 2 treatments: AAI and water; 3 time points: 3, 12 and 21 days). Three biological replicates for each condition. One replicate per array.

PLATFORM
GPL7202 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
20232387

