TITLE
Temporal analysis of  hippocampus in kainate-induced seizures. Koh-7K08NS002068-05-3

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) is the most common medically refractory epilepsy syndrome; kainic acid (KA) induced seizures have been studied as a MTLE model as limbic seizures produced by systemic injections of KA result in a distinctive pattern of neurodegeneration in the hippocampus that resembles human hippocampal sclerosis. In our " 2-hit " seizure model, animals subjected to seizures during week 2 of life become more susceptible to seizures later in life and sustain extensive hippocampal neuronal injury after second KA seizures in adulthood. Using high-density oligonucleotide gene arrays, we began to elucidate the molecular basis of this priming effect of early-life seizures and of the age-specific neuroprotection against seizure-induced neuronal injury. We seek to identify target genes for epileptogenesis and cell death by selecting transcripts that are differentially regulated at various times in the P15 and P30 hippocampus. To screen for and identify candidate genes responsible for epileptogenesis and seizure-induced cell death. We hypothesize that active process of cell death signaling and long-term synaptic changes leading to chronic epilepsy is mediated by distinct transcriptional responses in mature brain that are different from those in immature brain. We will select for transcripts that are highly regulated at 1, 6, 24, 72 and 240 hours (h) after KA-induced seizures at P30 compared to P15. These differentially regulated genes will serve as  potential target genes for therapeutic intervention. Highly regulated genes identified in our array analysis will then be confirmed by real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Causative roles of select genes will be directly tested by gene silencing using RNA interference technology or by gene delivery using viral vectors. Keywords: time-course

PLATFORM
GPL85 [RG_U34A] Affymetrix Rat Genome U34 Array

CITATIONS
15800381

