TITLE
Induction of intestinal Th17 cells by segmented filamentous bacteria

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The gastrointestinal tract of mammals is inhabited by hundreds of distinct species of commensal microorganisms that exist in a mutualistic relationship with the host. The process by which the commensal microbiota influence the host immune system is poorly understood. We show here that colonization of the small intestine of mice with a single commensal microbe, segmented filamentous bacterium (SFB), is sufficient to induce the appearance of CD4+ T helper cells that produce IL-17 and IL-22 (Th17 cells) in the lamina propria. SFB adhere tightly to the surface of epithelial cells in the terminal ileum of mice with Th17 cells but are absent from mice that have few Th17 cells. Colonization with SFB was correlated with increased expression of genes associated with inflammation, anti-microbial defenses, and tissue repair, and resulted in enhanced resistance to the intestinal pathogen Citrobacter rodentium. Control of Th17 cell differentiation by SFB may thus establish a balance between optimal host defense preparedness and potentially damaging T cell responses.  Manipulation of this commensal-regulated pathway may provide new opportunities for enhancing mucosal immunity and treating autoimmune disease.

DESIGN
We compared the gene expression profiles in the terminal ileum of Swiss-Webster GF mice before and after colonization with SFB, which induced robust Th17 cell differentiation. To sieve out host effects, the role of other microbiota, as well as other factors, we also evaluated the transcriptional program induced in Jackson C57BL/6 mice after co-housing with Taconic B6 animals, which also induces Th17 cell differentiation. 0.5 cm of the most distal part of the small intestine was dissected. Total RNA was extracted with TRIzol. RNA was labeled and hybridized to GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays following the Affymetrix protocols. Data were analyzed in GeneSpring GX10.

