TITLE
Identification of the major PEP-phosphotransferase systems (PTS) for glucose, mannose and cellobiose of L. monocytogenes

ORGANISM
Listeria monocytogenes EGD-e

SUMMARY
Identification of the major PEP-phosphotransferase systems (PTS) for glucose, mannose and cellobiose of Listeria monocytogenes, and their significance for extra- and intracellular growth. Transcriptional profile of prfA, the dependent genes and the PTS genes after growth in MM (minimal medium (Premaratne et al. 2001))  (supplemented with 10 mM Glucose). Listeria monocytogenes EGD-e possesses 86 pts genes encoding 29 complete and several incomplete PEP-dependent phosphotransferase systems (PTS) for the transport of carbohydrates and sugar alcohols. By a systematic deletion analysis we identified the major PTS involved in glucose, mannose and cellobiose transport, when L. monocytogenes grows in a defined minimal medium in the presence of either of these carbohydrates. Under these conditions two of the four PTSMan and at least one of the five PTSGlc function as glucose transporter with different affinities. Cellobiose is transported (with different efficiencies) mainly by two of the six PTSLac and by a PTSGlc that also transports glucose. One of the PTSMan and both PTSLac are regulated by LevR-homologous PRD containing transcriptional activators, detected with PRD deletion mutants. The growth rates of mutants that are lacking these PTS are drastically reduced compared to the wild-type strain upon growth in a defined medium with low concentrations of glucose and cellobiose, respectively. In contrast, replication of these PTS mutants within epithelial cells or macrophages is as efficient as that of the wild-type strain. Keywords: pts and prd deletion mutants

DESIGN
A total of three independently isolated RNA samples from each condition were used for the analysis. PTS Samples: GSM458191-GSM458208 PRD Samples: GSM458209-GSM458214

PLATFORM
GPL6554 University of Wuerzburg Listeria monocytogenes PTS 1K microarray version1

CITATIONS
20056707

