TITLE
Identification of angiotensin II-responsive genes in the kidney

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
In order to characterize gene expression networks linked to AT1 angiotensin receptors in the kidney, we carried out genome-wide transcriptional analysis of  RNA from kidneys of wild-type (WT) and AT1A receptor-deficient mice (KOs) at baseline and after 2 days of angiotensin II infusion (1 ug/kg/min), using Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Arrays. At baseline, 405 genes were differentially expressed ( > 1.5X) between WT and KO kidneys. Of these, more than 80% were up-regulated in the KO group including genes involved in inflammation, oxidative stress, and cell proliferation. After 2 days of angiotensin II infusion in WT mice, expression of ~805 genes was altered (18% up-regulated, 82% repressed). Genes in metabolism and ion transport pathways were up-regulated while there was attenuated expression of protective genes against oxidative stress including glutathione synthetase and mitochondrial SOD2. Angiotensin II infusion has little effect on blood pressure in KOs.  Nonetheless, expression of more than 250 genes was altered in kidneys from KO mice during angiotensin II infusion; 14% were up-regulated, while 86% were repressed including genes involved in immune responses, angiogenesis, and glutathione metabolism.  Between WT and KO kidneys during angiotensin II infusion, 728 genes were differentially expressed; 10% were increased and 90% were decreased in the WT group.  Differentially regulated pathways included those involved in ion transport, immune responses, metabolism, apoptosis, cell proliferation, and oxidative stress. This genome-wide assessment should facilitate identification of critical distal pathways linked to blood pressure regulation.

DESIGN
To define gene expression patterns in kidney triggered by of activation AT1 receptors, we used genome-wide transcriptional analysis of RNA from kidneys of wild-type and AT1A receptor-deficient mice at baseline and after 2 days of angiotensin II infusion (1 ug/kg/min), using Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Arrays. All of the experiments were conducted with male mice  2.5 months old and included 3 mice per experimental group. Synthesis of cRNA, hybridization and scanning of chips were conducted by Duke University microarray core facility (Duke University, Durham, NC).

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
20807774

