TITLE
Supplementary dietary calcium stimulates faecal fat and bile acid excretion, but does not protect against obesity and insulin resistance in C57BL/6J mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
There is increased interest in the potential protective role of dietary Ca in the development of metabolic disorders related to the metabolic syndrome. Ca-induced intestinal precipitation of fatty acids and bile acids as well as systemic metabolic effects of Ca on adipose tissue is proposed to play a causal role. In this experiment, we have studied all these aspects to validate the suggested protective effect of Ca supplementation, independent of other dietary changes, on the development of diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance. In our diet intervention study, C57BL/6J mice were fed high-fat diets differing in Ca concentrations (50 v. 150 mmol/kg). Faecal excretion analyses showed an elevated precipitation of intestinal fatty acids (2路3-fold; P < 0路01) and bile acids (2-fold; P < 0路01) on the high-Ca diet. However, this only led to a slight reduction in fat absorption (from 98 to 95 %; P < 0路01), mainly in the distal small intestine as indicated by gene expression changes. We found no effect on body-weight gain. Lipolysis and lipogenesis-related parameters in adipose tissue also showed no significant changes on the high-Ca diet, indicating no systemic effects of dietary Ca on adiposity. Furthermore, early gene expression changes of intestinal signaling molecules predicted no protective effect of dietary Ca on the development of insulin resistance, which was confirmed by equal values for insulin sensitivity on both diets. Taken together, our data do not support the proposed protective effect of dietary Ca on the development of obesity and/or insulin resistance, despite a significant increase in fecal excretion of fatty acids and bile acids. Keywords: Diet intervention study

DESIGN
Nine-week-old mice were fed a high fat purified diet with a low calcium concentration of  50mmol/kg (LCa diet) or a high calcium concentration of 150mmol/kg (HCa diet) for 8 weeks. Body weight was recorded weekly and after 7 weeks of diet intervention an oral glucose tolerance test was performed. For microarray analysis, after 2 weeks of diet intervention, 6 mice per diet group were anaesthetized with a mixture of isofluorane (1.5%), nitrous oxide (70%) and oxygen (30%) and the small intestines were excised. Adhering fat and pancreatic tissue were carefully removed. The small intestines were divided in three equal parts along the proximal to distal axis (SI 1, SI 2 and SI 3) and microarray analysis was performed on pooled mucosal scrapings.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21205428

