TITLE
DNMT1 Maintains Progenitor Function in Self-Renewing Somatic Tissue

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Progenitor cells maintain self-renewing tissues throughout life by sustaining their capacity for proliferation while suppressing cell cycle exit and terminal differentiation. DNA methylation provides a potential epigenetic mechanism for the cellular memory needed to preserve the somatic progenitor state through repeated cell divisions. DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) maintains DNA methylation patterns after cellular replication. Although dispensable for embryonic stem cell maintenance, a clear role for DNMT1 in maintaining the progenitor state in constantly replenished somatic tissues, such as mammalian epidermis, is uncharacterized. Here we show that DNMT1 is essential for supporting epidermal progenitor cell function. DNMT1 protein was found enriched in undifferentiated cells, where it was required to retain proliferative stamina and suppress differentiation. In tissue, DNMT1 depletion led to exit from the progenitor cell compartment, premature differentiation and eventual tissue loss. These effects correlated with DNA methylation as genome-wide analysis revealed that a significant portion of epidermal differentiation gene promoters were methylated in self-renewing conditions but were subsequently demethylated during differentiation.

DESIGN
Gene expression analysis: To establish a differentiation signature for primary human keratinocytes, total RNA was isolated in biologic duplicate from cells cultured in growth conditions and high calcium differentiation conditions and hybridized to Affymetrix HG-U133 2.0 Plus arrays. This gene signature was also compared to DNMT1 deficient cells cultured in growth conditions. Methylated DNA profiling: To globally characterize DNA methylation in primary human keratinocytes, genomic DNA was immunoprecipitated using a 5-methylcytidine antibody, amplified, and hybridized to NimbleGen HG18 promoter tiling arrays. Profiling was done using DNA isolated in growth conditions as well as differentiation conditions.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array GPL6325 NimbleGen Homo sapiens HG18 promoter 1 of 2 GPL6326 NimbleGen Homo sapiens HG18 promoter 2 of 2

CITATIONS
20081831

