TITLE
RNAs expression profiling in a resistant and a susceptible grapevine cultivar to Plasmopara viticola

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera ; Vitis riparia

SUMMARY
Plasmopara viticola (Berk. and Curt.) Berl. and de Toni is the agent of the destructive disease known as grapevine downy mildew, for the control of which intensive fungicide treatments are required. Natural sources of resistance are available in several wild Vitis species, which are being used in traditional breeding approaches. However, molecular switches, signals and effectors involved in resistance are poorly understood. In this paper we report a microarray analysis of early transcriptional changes associated to P. viticola infection in both susceptible Vitis vinifera and resistant Vitis riparia plants (12 and 24 h post inoculation). To provide a biological basis to the choice of time points for transcriptome analyses, we performed microscopic examinations of infected tissues at 12, 24, 48 and 96 hpi.  Data suggest that resistance in V. riparia is mainly a post-infectional event and involves a large reprogramming of host metabolism. Transcripts of signal transduction-related genes are specifically and often strongly accumulated in response to infection. Well known defence genes also show marked transcript increases, especially  pathogenesis-related proteins PR-10 and stylbene synthases, and genes related to an hypersensitive reaction. On the other hand, V. vinifera mounts a much weaker transcriptional response, involving mainly defence genes,  not effective enough in preventing pathogen infection.

DESIGN
Leaves from one resistant (V. riparia cv. Gloire de Montpellier) and one susceptible (V.vinifera cv. Pinot Noir) grapevine cultivars grown in vitro were infected with the oomycete Plasmopara viticola, and transcriptome changes were investigated at 12h and 24h after infection. Three biological replicates were considered and each hybridization was performed twice. One color labeling was performed

PLATFORM
GPL8025 GrapeArray 1.2 developed by the Italian-French Public Consortium for Grapevine Genome Characterization

CITATIONS
20167053

