TITLE
WNT4 is required for ovarian follicle development and female fertility

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
To study the physiological role of WNT4 in the postnatal ovary, a mouse strain bearing a floxed Wnt4 allele was created and mated to the Amhr2tm3(cre)Bhr strain to target deletion of Wnt4 to granulosa cells. Wnt4flox/-;Amhr2tm3(cre)Bhr/+ mice had significantly reduced ovary weights and produced smaller litters (P < 0.05). Serial follicle counting demonstrated that, while Wnt4flox/-;Amhr2tm3(cre)Bhr/+ mice were born with a normal ovarian reserve and maintained normal numbers of small follicles until puberty, they had only 25.2% of the normal number of healthy antral follicles. Some Wnt4flox/-;Amhr2tm3(cre)Bhr/+ mice had no antral follicles or corpora lutea and underwent premature follicle depletion. RTPCR analyses of Wnt4flox/-;Amhr2tm3(cre)Bhr/+ granulosa cells and cultured granulosa cells that overexpress WNT4 demonstrated that WNT4 regulates the expression of Star, Cyp11a1 and Cyp19, steroidogenic genes previously identified as downstream targets of the WNT signaling effector CTNNB1. WNT4- and CTNNB1-overexpressing cultured granulosa cells were analyzed by microarray for alterations in gene expression, which showed that WNT4 also regulates a series of genes involved in late follicle development and the cellular stress response via the WNT/CTNNB1 signaling pathway. Together, these data indicate that WNT4 is required for normal antral follicle development, and may act by regulating granulosa cell functions including steroidogenesis.

DESIGN
Granulosa cells were obtained from 20-26 day-old mice of various genotypes 48h after eCG treatment, using the needle puncture method as previously described. Cells were then infected with adenoviruses to express eGFP or Cre, or overexpress WNT4 in serum-free medium, and subsequently harvested for RNA extraction as described below. Preliminary experiments demonstrated that an infection efficiency of > 80% could be obtained at an MOI of ~50 (as determined by analysis of fluorescent signal in Ad-eGFP-infected cells) and that the Ad-Cre and Ad-WNT4 viruses produced efficient recombination of the floxed Ctnnb1 alleles and robust WNT4 overexpression, respectively. Microarray analyses were done using triplicate RNA samples from each adenoviral treatment described above, and using mouse expression set 430 microarrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA).

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
20371632

