TITLE
Gene Expression Profiles Characterize Inflammation Stages in the Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome in Mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) carries about a 50 percent mortality and is frequently associated with an infection (sepsis). Life-support treatment with assisted ventilation rescues many patients, although superimposed infection or multiple organ failure can result in death. The outcome of a patient developing sepsis highly depends on the degree of pre-existing inflammation prior to the infection. In this study, we describe each stage of the inflammation process using a transcriptomic approach. Female C57BL6/J mice received an intra-veinous oleic acid injection to induce an acute lung injury and lung expression patterns have been analyzed using a 9900 cDNA mouse microarray (MusV29K). Our gene-expression analysis revealed maked changes in the immune and inflammatory response metabolic pathways, notably lipid metabolism and transcription. The early pro-inflammatory stage (1H-1H30) is characterized by the release of immune response and activation of inflammatory mechanisms. Later (3H-4H), the immune cells migrate into inflamed tissues through interaction with vascular endothelial cells. Finally, at late stages of inflammation (18H-24H), metabolism is deeply disturbed. Highly expressed pro-inflammatory cytokines activate transcription of many genes as well as lipid metabolism. This global overview of critical events occuring during lung inflammation is essential to understand infectious pathologies such as sepsis where inflammation and infection are interwined. From now on, it becomes possible to isolate the impact of a pathogen at the transcriptomic level from the global gene expression modifications resulting from the infection associated with the inflammation. Also, our work allowed to identify genes involved in the response to inflammation. Among those, several may be candidate fro gene therapy.

DESIGN
Wild-type female C57Bl/6J mice, 7 weeks old, were obtained from Charles River and housed in a specific pathogen-free animal facility. We studied 36 mice divided into 6 groups. Each group included one or two mice administered with physiological serum and 3 to 7 mice administered with OA. Each group can be distinguished given the incubation time: 1H, 1H30, 3H, 4H, 18H and 24H. All experimental procedures involving animals were approved by the veterinary office of the Ministry of Agriculture, France (authorization number: 13-27). 16 mRNA samples extracted from an individual organ were run on a single microarray. In addition, 22 samples were run on two microarrays, and were considered as technical replicates. This corresponds to a total of 60 microarrays. 9 microarrays were hybridized with mice administered with physiological serum and 51  were hybridized with mice administered with oleic acid.

PLATFORM
GPL9478 MusV29K

CITATIONS
20628605

