TITLE
Role of miR-210 in late stages of lung cancer: mitochondrial alterations associated with a modulation of HIF1 activity

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Recent studies have identified miR-210 among a set of hypoxia-regulated miRNAs, and shown the central regulatory role played by HIF to control transcription of this miRNA. Contradictory data exist concerning the regulation and roles of miR-210 during cancer progression. miR-210 appears at the same time over-expressed in some solid tumors (breast, pancreas, head and neck carcinomas, gliomas) while often deleted in ovarian carcinoma. It has been shown that depending on the tissue type or cellular model, miR-210 was indeed able to either promote entry into the cell cycle and to inhibit apoptosis or rather repress tumor initiation. We show here deregulation of several miRNAs in human lung cancer biopsies, including an over-expression of miR-210 which appears specific of late-stages of the tumor ( > stage 2). MiR-210 function was then analyzed in the lung adenocarcinoma cell line A549. We found that miR-210 induced a delayed inhibition of proliferation associated with an induction of cell death. We also observed that mir-210 induces a loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and the apparition of an aberrant mitochondrial phenotype. mRNA expression profiling of cells overexpressing mir-210 revealed a specific signature characterized by an enrichment in mir-210 predicted targets among the downregulated transcripts (57 out of 243, p < 10-12). Functional annotation of this set of mir-210-regulated transcripts, which includes several subunits of Electron Transport Chain (ETC) complex I and complex II revealed enrichment for terms such as 'cell death' and 'mitochondrial dysfunction'. Two of these ETC subunits, predicted to be targets of mir-210 by several bioinformatics prediction tools, were experimentally confirmed after cloning of their respective 3'UTR in a luciferase reporter vector. Finally, we provide experimental evidence indicating that these mitochondrial alterations could modulate HIF via a positive regulatory loop. Overall, our data strongly suggest that mir-210 could mediate two apparently opposite functions: i) apoptosis through targeting of specific mitochondrial components ii) a modulation of HIF through a positive regulatory loop. We propose that this dual behavior can explain the contradictory data regarding the impact of miR-210 during cancer progression. This SuperSeries is composed of the SubSeries listed below.

DESIGN
Refer to individual Series.

