TITLE
A methyl transferase links the circadian clock to the regulation of alternative splicing

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana ; Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Study on differential gene expression and splicing between wildtype and clock mutants. This study is part of a comparative analysis of the role of Protein Methyltransferase 5 in the regulation of transcriptional and post-transcriptional processes simultaneously in Arabidopsis and Drosophila. Circadian rhythms allow organisms to time biological processes to the most appropriate phases of the day/night cycle1. Post-transcriptional regulation is emerging as an important component of circadian networks2-6, but the molecular mechanisms linking the circadian clock to the control of RNA processing are largely unknown. Here we show that Protein Arginine Methyl Transferase 5 (PRMT5), which transfers methyl groups to arginine residues present in histones7 and Sm spliceosomal proteins8,9, links the circadian clock to the control of alternative splicing in plants. Mutations in prmt5impair multiple circadian rhythms in Arabidopsis thaliana and this phenotype is caused, at least in part, by a strong alteration in alternative splicing of the core-clock gene PSEUDO RESPONSE REGULATOR 9 (PRR9). Furthermore, genome wide studies show that PRMT5 contributes to regulate many pre-mRNA splicing events most likely modulating 5´splice site (5´ss) recognition. PRMT5 expression shows daily and circadian oscillations, and this contributes to mediate the circadian regulation of expression and alternative splicing of a subset of genes. Circadian rhythms in locomotor activity are also disrupted in dart5, a mutant affected in the Drosophila melanogaster PRMT5 homolog, and this is associated with alterations in splicing of the core-clock gene period (per) and several clock associated genes. Our results reveal a key role for PRMT5 in the regulation of alternative splicing and indicate that the interplay between the circadian clock and the regulation of alternative splicing by PRMT5 constitutes a common mechanism that helps organisms to synchronize physiological processes with daily changes in environmental conditions.

DESIGN
Each genotype has three replicates, Single channel. Two species, each with wildtype and mutant. For the gene expression Samples (GSM586328-33): Wild type (WT) plants and prmt5-5 mutant plants were grown under continuous white light for three weeks, at 22 degrees centigrades. Total RNA extracted from aerial tissue was used for microarray analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array GPL1979 AtTile1F to Arabidopsis Tiling 1.0F GPL6882 Affymetrix Drosophila Genome Tiling Array 1.0F (Dm35b_MF_v02)

CITATIONS
20962777

