TITLE
Expression data from human neutrophils exposed to uropathogenic and commensal Esherichia coli.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The establishment of bacterial infections at epithelial surfaces is determined by the balance of virulence attributes of the pathogen with the activity of innate host defenses.  Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) are key responders in many bacterial infections, but the mechanisms by which pathogens subvert these early responses to establish infection are largely undefined.  Here, we model these early interactions between human PMN and the primary cause of urinary tract infections, namely uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC).  Our objective was to define virulence phenotypes of uropathogens (as compared with laboratory and commensal E. coli strains) that permit evasion of PMN activity.  We found that UPEC strains resist phagocytic killing and dampen the production of antimicrobial reactive oxygen species by PMNs.  Analysis of the global transcriptional responses of PMN to E. coli strains revealed that UPEC exposure downregulates the expression of PMN genes involved in proinflammatory signaling and PMN chemotaxis, adhesion, and migration.  Consistent with these data, UPEC attenuated transepithelial neutrophil recruitment in an in vitro model of acute infection.  We propose that these UPEC strategies are important in the establishment of epithelial infection, and that the findings are germane to a range of bacterial infections at epithelial surfaces. We used microarrays to detail the global program of gene expression in human neutrophils in response to a uropathogenic bacteria compared to a closely related non-pathogenic strain relative to control samples with no bacteria. Our goal was to elucidate a pathogen-specific response. We chose an early time point of 60 minutes to evaluate the accute response to infection.

DESIGN
Human neutrophils were exposed to pathogenic or commensal Escherichia coli for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays

