TITLE
Dissecting the developmental transcriptomes of rice

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa Indica Group

SUMMARY
Transcriptional programs are important for the development of complex eukaryotic organisms. Suites of genes expressed with temporal and spatial controls by regulatory networks in response to environmental cues are the cornerstone for achieving the specification of morphology and physiology of the tissue or organ systems. Thus, an important issue of developmental biology is to define the subsets of expressed genes and their expression patterns that are related to the organ or tissue system. Rice is a model plant for cereal genome research. Although large amounts of data of whole genome expression have been generated in recent years in rice, the majority of the studies were designed to identify differentially expressed genes between controls and treatments with certain experimental conditions such as biotic, abiotic or light, or to investigate the comparative expression patterns between wild type and mutants of certain genes. Only in a few cases were the datasets designed for studying the transcriptomes of a limited number of organs and cell types. Thus, there is still insufficiency in the available datasets that would allow for the establishment of expression patterns for suits of genes during the developmental processes of rice. In this study, we collected 39 tissues/organs covering the life cycle of the rice from two indica varieties Minghui 63 and Zhenshan 97, and the Affymetrix GeneChip Rice Genome Array was used to investigate the transcriptomes of these organs. The objective was to develop a genomic resource of genome-wide dynamic transcriptome of the rice plant, which could be used as the reference gene expression map for rice and other cereals. Also, the dataset is used to identify the candidates of genes with potential functions in regulating the development of rice or breeding practice.   Keywords: rice, expression profiling, life cycle, development, inflorescence

DESIGN
To dissect the developmental transcriptomes of rice, a total of 39 tissues covering the entire tissue culture process and life cycle were sampled from two indica varieties Minghui 63 and Zhenshan 97. And the Affymetrix Genechip rice Genome Array was used to investigate their dynamic transcriptomes. Two independent biological replicates were sampled from most tissues, except two seedling and three panicle tissues, for which three independent biological replicates each with two technical replicates were sampled, resulting in a dataset of 190 microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL2025 [Rice] Affymetrix Rice Genome Array

CITATIONS
20003165

