TITLE
Germfree C57BL/6J mice are resistant to high fat diet-induced insulin resistance and have altered cholesterol metabolism

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Germfree (GF) mice have been used as a model to study the contribution of the intestinal microbiota to metabolic energy balance of the host. Despite a wealth of knowledge accumulated since the 1940’s, the response of GF mice to a high fat diet is largely unknown. In the present study, we compared the metabolic consequences of a high fat (HF) diet on GF and conventional (Conv) C57BL/6J mice. As expected, Conv mice developed obesity and glucose intolerance with a HF diet. In contrast, GF mice remained lean and resisted the HF diet-induced insulin resistance. The anti-obesity phenotype of GF/HF mice was accompanied by reduced caloric intake, diminished food efficiency, and excessive fecal lipid excretion contributed to the reduced food efficiency. In addition, HF diet-induced hypercholesterolemia was ameliorated, which was partially due to an increase in fecal cholesterol excretion. However, hepatic cholesterols were increased in GF/HF mice. Elevated nuclear SREBP2 proteins and the up-regulation of cholesterol biosynthesis genes support the increased liver cholesterol biosynthesis in GF/HF mice. The resistance to HF diet-induced metabolic abnormalities in GF mice was also associated with a reduced immune response, indicated by low plasma pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory markers. These data suggest that the gut microbiota of Conv mice contributes to HF diet-induced obesity, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia and hepatic steatosis in mice. Thus, results of the present study describe the metabolic responses of GF mice to a HF diet and further our understandings of the relationship between the gut microbiota and the host.

DESIGN
Germfree and conventional C57BL/6J mice were fed with a high fat diet for 11 weeks. Then, all mice were sacrified under 10-h food deprevation, and liver samples of germfree (n=14) and conventional (n=16) were examined.

PLATFORM
GPL6103 Illumina mouseRef-8 v1.1 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
20724524

