TITLE
Analysis of gene expression profiles on 38 days-old sea bass heads

ORGANISM
Dicentrarchus labrax

SUMMARY
A sea bass oligo microarray platform was used to profile gene expression in whole heads of 38 days-old sea bass affected by prognathism, a skeletal malformation that strongly affects sea bass production. Two different conditions: i) prognathous individuals, and ii) normal individuals were analyzed. For each condition, total RNA was extracted from three (3) independent biological replicates, each consisting of pools of five (5) heads. Statistical analysis with SAM (Significance Analysis of Microarray) didn’t identify any difference in expression patterns between the two groups. Samples were then employed as biological replicates to determine array-to-array reproducibility, the degree of mutual agreement among replicates was estimated using Pearson correlation coefficients on the entire set of expression values. For all pairs of experiments correlation coefficients were always significant (p-value < 0.01) and never less than 0.99.

DESIGN
In this study, we analyzed six (6) samples, three (3) pools of heads dissected from normal sea bass and three (3) dissected from individuals affected by prognathism. Gene expression profiling was performed using the Agilent-019810 Dicentrarchus labrax Oligo Microarray platform (6 arrays, no replicate) based on single-colour detection (Cyanine-3 only). Microarrays  were scanned with Agilent scanner G2565BA (barcode on the left, DNA on the back surface, scanned through the glass) at a resolution of 5 microns; all slides were scanned twice at two different sensitivity settings (XDRHi 100% and XDRLo 10%); the scanner software created a unique ID for each pair of XDR scans and saved it to both scan image files. Feature Extraction (FE) 9.5 used XDR ID to link the pairs of scans together automatically when extracting data. The signal left after all the FE processing steps have been completed is ProcessedSignal that contains the Multiplicatively Detrended, Background-Subtracted Signal.

