TITLE
Analysis of Meniscal Degeneration and Meniscal Gene Expression

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Menisci play a vital role in load transmission, shock absorption and joint stability.  The current dogma is that the menisci simply protects the cartilage and play no role in osteoarthritis (OA) unless they are injured. However, there is increasing evidence suggesting that OA menisci may not merely be bystanders in the disease process of OA. This study sought: 1) to determine the prevalence of meniscal   degeneration in OA patients, 2) to examine gene expression in OA meniscal cells compared to normal control meniscal cells, and 3) to test the hypothesis that OA meniscal cells are different from normal meniscal cells. The grades of meniscal degeneration correlated in a positive fashion with the grades of articular cartilage degeneration (r = 0.672; P < 0.0001). Many genes classified in the biological processes of immune response, inflammatory response,  biomineral formation and cell proliferation, including major histocompatibility complex, class II, DP alpha 1 (HLA-DPA1), integrin, beta 2 (ITGB2), ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1 (ENPP1), ankylosis, progressive homolog (ANKH) and fibroblast growth factor 7 (FGF7), were expressed at higher levels compared to normal control meniscal cells. In addition, many genes that were previously implicated in OA were also expressed at higher levels in OA meniscal cells, including ADAM metallopeptidase with thrombospondin type 1 motif, 5 (ADAMTS5). Our findings suggest that OA is a whole joint disease. Meniscal cells may   play an active role in the development of OA. Investigation of the gene expression   profiles of OA meniscal cells may reveal new therapeutic targets for OA therapy and   also may uncover novel disease markers for early diagnosis of OA.

DESIGN
Studies were approved by our human subjects Institutional Review Board. Menisci and articular cartilage were collected during joint replacement surgery for OA patients (OA specimens) and lower limb amputation surgery for osteosarcoma patients   (normal control specimens), and graded. Meniscal cells were prepared from the meniscal tissues and expanded in monolayer culture. Differential gene expression in OA meniscal cells and normal control meniscal cells was examined using Affymetrix   microarray and real time RT-PCR.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
20109188

