TITLE
CGH profiling of Bacillus cereus isolates from the CDC historical strain collection

ORGANISM
Bacillus anthracis ; Bacillus cereus ; Bacillus anthracis str. Sterne ; Bacillus cereus G9842

SUMMARY
The goal of this study is the discovery of (a) meaningful phylogenomic relationships among members of this B. cereus/B. anthracis group, and (b) reliable gene-phenotype associations, e.g. recognition of links between genomic traits and the ability of certain strains to cause various forms of disease. We also tried to elucidate genome evolution aspects that may lead to the emergence of variants that are capable (or have the potential) of causing anthrax-like disease. This large-scale comparative genomics approach is unprecedented for this taxonomic group. Dr. A. Hoffmaster (CDC) provided the PFGRC with 73 B. cereus and B. anthracis isolates from the CDC culture collection. Of these, 27 were isolated from patients with severe or systemic disease; ten isolates of this group were obtained from patients (welding factory workers) with anthrax-like disease or from the environment near their workplace. Another set of 26 represented isolates from food-born illnesses. Of the 26 gastrointestinal disease isolates (GIDI), 10 were obtained from patients with diarrhea, whereas another set of 10 had been shown to harbor the emetic (vomit) toxin gene by PCR. The rest of the group consisted of 20 isolates with various phenotypes. All strains were screened for their genomic content using the B. cereus/B. anthracis species microarray.

DESIGN
Seventy-three query strains were investigated in this study, with each query strain hybridized against the reference strain, Sterne. Dye-swap experiments were performed with all the 73 strains on both chipA and chipB of the microarray, for a total of four or more hybridizations per query strain. Each 70mer oligo spotted on the B. cereus species microarray is spotted once. Positive controls on the array consist of oligos designed from the sequenced reference genome, Sterne, and negative controls on the array consist of oligos designed from the thale cress plant, Arabidopsis thaliana.

PLATFORM
GPL9095 JCVI PFGRC Bacillus anthracis 23K vt3a array designed primarily based on strain Sterne GPL9098 JCVI PFGRC Bacillus anthracis 25K vt3b array designed primarily based on strain Sterne

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

