TITLE
Whole Blood Gene Expression Profiles Distinguish Patients with Single versus Recurrent Venous Thromboembolism

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Pulmonary embolism is a life threatening manifestation of VTE that occurs in at least half the patients on presentation.  In addition, VTE recurs in up to 30% of patients after a standard course of anticoagulation, and there is not a reliable way of predicting recurrence.  We investigated whether gene expression profiles of whole blood could distinguish patients with VTE from healthy controls, single VTE from those with recurrence, and DVT alone from those with PE. 70 adults with VTE on warfarin and 63 healthy controls were studied.  Patients with antiphospholipid syndrome or cancer were excluded.  Blood was collected in PAXgene tubes, RNA isolated, and gene expression profiles obtained using Affymetrix arrays.  We developed a 50 gene model that distinguished healthy controls from subjects with VTE with excellent receiver operating characteristics (AUC 0.94; P < 0.0001).  We also discovered a separate 50 gene model that distinguished subjects with a single VTE from those with recurrent VTE with good receiver operating characteristics (AUC 0.75; P=0.008).  In contrast, we were unable to distinguish subjects with DVT from those with PE using gene expression profiles.  Gene expression profiles of whole blood can distinguish subjects with VTE from healthy controls and subjects with a single VTE from those with recurrence.  Additional studies should be performed to validate these results and develop diagnostic tests.  Gene expression profiling is likely translatable to other thrombotic disorders(e.g., patients with cancer and VTE).

DESIGN
70 adults with one or more prior VTE on warfarin and 63 healthy controls were studied.  Patients with antiphospholipid syndrome or cancer were excluded.  Blood was collected in PAXgene tubes, RNA isolated, and gene expression profiles obtained using Affymetrix arrays.

