TITLE
miR-335 orchestrates cell proliferation, migration and differentiation in human mesenchymal stem cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) have an extensive potential for clinical applications in cell therapy. However, very little is known of the specific molecular regulatory mechanisms that control the therapeutical properties of these cells. We aimed to identify microRNAs (miRNAs) that could be involved in controlling the transition between the self-renewing (undifferentiated) and the reparative (differentiated) phenotypes of hMSCs. MicroRNA microarrays were used to identify miRNAs that are upregulated in undifferentiated hMSCs. For that, we compared the miRNA expression profiles of undifferentiated bone marrow-derived hMSCs with the same primary cell lines after 9 days of in vitro adipogenic or osteogenic induction. We also compared the miRNA expression profiles of undifferentiated hMSCs with skin fibroblasts (a mesenchymal cell lineage with a more restricted differentiation potential). These experiments allowed us to identify miR-335 as the only miRNA downregulated upon MSC differentiation as well as in MSCs in comparison with skin fibroblasts. Gene expression microarrays were used to identify genes that are downregulated in hMSCs overexpressing miR-335. We compared the miRNA expression profiles of hMSCs transduced with a lentiviral vector encoding miR-335 with MSCs transduced with a control lentiviral vector. Our results suggest miR-335 downregulation could be a critical trigger for the initiation of MSCs activities involved in tissue repair and remodelling, including cell proliferation, migration and differentiation.

DESIGN
We compared the miRNA expression profiles of undifferentiated bone marrow-derived hMSCs with the same primary cell lines after 9 days of adipogenic or osteogenic induction, as well as with skin fibroblasts. A total of four independent samples were used for each condition. For the adipogenic/osteogenic vs. undifferentiated MSC comparison, the RNA samples were pooled (two independent samples/pool) before labeling. We also compared the miRNA expression profiles of hMSCs transduced with the lentiviral vector pLV-EmGFP-MIRN335 with MSCs transduced with the control vector pLV-EmGFP-Mock. For the gene expression microarrays, a total of three independent samples were used for each condition.

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version) GPL8227 Agilent-019118 Human miRNA Microarray 2.0 G4470B (miRNA ID version)

CITATIONS
21164520

