TITLE
Analysis of anther development by identifying downstream genes controlled by MS35/MYB26

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
MALE STERILITY 35 (MS35/ MYB26) is a R2R3-type MYB transcription factor (Steiner-Large et al., 2003). MS35 is suggested to be a key regulator in the process of lignified secondary thickening in the anther endothecium which provides mechanical force for anther dehiscence (Dawson et al., 1999). The ms35 mutant bears non-dehiscent anthers and thus exhibits a male sterile phenotype. This microarray experiment aims to identify genes controlled by MS35 and thus establish the precise role MS35 plays during anther development. We have demonstrated that MS35 is expressed in the anther during pollen mitotic divisions. Comparisons of gene expression will be carried out between anthers from the Ler.gl (wild-type control) and ms35.gl (mutant) to identify genes with altered expression due to the ms35 mutation. The use of the gl marker will enable a prompt identification of the ms35 mutant amongst the segregating population. The wild-type control line was chosen to be Ler.gl which ensures that the changes of gene expression are not due to the gl mutation. Plants were grown in growth chambers at 22h of daylight (167 umol.m2.sec-1) at 24 C and 2h of night at 24 C. Developmental stages of anthers were defined by bud position and DAPI staining. As soon as the plants showed three fertile or sterile siliques, anther and filaments were collected from both lines at Pollen Mitosis I (PM I), bicellular, and PM II stage, separately. RNA was extracted using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, USA) and digested with DNase to eliminate genomic DNA contamination. The identified genes will be further analysed using bioinformatics and genomic (knockout) resources that are available for Arabidopsis.

DESIGN
12 samples were used in this experiment.

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

