TITLE
Comparative analysis of gene expression in retinal layers

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Purpose: The aim of this study was to give a comprehensive overview on spatial distribution of gene expression in the adult mouse retina and integrate this information into existing retinal gene expression databases.    Methods: Total RNA was collected by laser capture microdissection from the ganglion cell layer, inner nuclear layer, photoreceptors and the retinal pigmented epithelium of adult mice and was analyzed by oligonucleotide microarrays. The results were validated by quantitative real time PCR and in situ hybridization.    Results: The applied method resulted in good separation of cells of different retinal layers. The spatial distribution of gene expression was determined on a global scale in the retina and the RPE. Our results show good correlation with previously reported retinal gene expression and describe genes not yet characterized in the context of the retina.    Conclusions: The complexity of the vertebrate retina makes it necessary to determine not only temporal but spatial distributions of gene expression .Our work expands the already significant but still incomplete knowledge of retinal gene expression and hopefully facilitates functional characterization of key factors of retinal development and maintenance.

DESIGN
Laser capture microdissected regions of the adult mouse neuronal retina and retinal pigmented epithelium were subjected to microarray analysis. 5 conditions were investigated: ganglion cell layer (GCL,  3 biological replicates), innner nuclear layer (INL, 3 biological replicates), photoreceptor layer from Blk6 (PR-WT, 3 biological replicates) and NrlKO animals (PR-Nrl, 2 biological replicates) and retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE, 1 biological replicate). All samples are co-hybridized with a reference sample (retina). 2 or 3 technical replicates were used for each biological sample. technical replicate - labeled-extract: GC1-1, GC1-2, GC1-3 technical replicate - labeled-extract: GC2-1, GC2-2, GC2-3 technical replicate - labeled-extract: GCpool-1, GCpool-2, GCpool-3 technical replicate - labeled-extract: INL1-1, INL1-2, INL1-3 technical replicate - labeled-extract: INL2-1, INL2-2, INL2-3 technical replicate - labeled-extract: INLpool-1, INLpool-2, INLpool-3 technical replicate - labeled-extract: PR-Nrl1-1, PR-Nrl1-2 technical replicate - labeled-extract: PR-Nrl2-1, PR-Nrl2-2, PR-Nrl2-3 technical replicate - labeled-extract: PR-WT1-1, PR-WT1-2, PR-WT1-3 technical replicate - labeled-extract: PR-WT2-1, PR-WT2-2, PR-WT2-3 technical replicate - labeled-extract: PR-WTpool-1, PR-WTpool-2, PR-WTpool-3 technical replicate - labeled-extract: RPE-1, RPE-2, RPE-3

PLATFORM
GPL9744 JHU WEI Mouse MEEBO 35K oligo array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

