TITLE
Changes of myocardial gene expression and protein composition in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy after immunoadsorption with subsequent immunoglobulin substitution

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Immunoadsorption with subsequent immunoglobulin substitution (IA/IgG) represents a therapeutic approach for patients with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Here, we studied which molecular cardiac alterations are initiated after this treatment. Transcription profiling of endomyocardial biopsies with Affymetrix whole genome arrays was performed on 33 paired samples of DCM patients collected before and six months after IA/IgG. Therapy-related effects on myocardial protein levels were analysed by label free proteome profiling for a subset of 23 DCM patients. Data were analysed regarding therapy-associated differences in gene expression and protein levels by comparing responders (defined by improvement of left ventricular ejection fraction ≥ 20% relative and ≥5% absolute) and non-responders. Responders to IA/IgG showed a decrease in serum N-terminal proBNP levels in comparison to baseline which was accompanied by a decreased expression of heart failure markers such as angiotensin converting enzyme 2 or periostin. However, despite clinical improvement even in responders IA/IgG did not trigger general inversion of DCM associated molecular alterations in myocardial tissue. Transcriptome profiling revealed reduced gene expression for connective tissue growth factor, fibronectin, and collagen type I in responders. In contrast, in non-responders after IA/IgG, for fibrosis associated genes and proteins showed elevated levels whereas values were reduced or maintained in responders. Thus, improvement of LV function after IA/IgG seems to be related to a reduced gene expression of heart failure markers and pro-fibrotic molecules as well as reduced fibrosis progression.

DESIGN
gene expression and protein profiling of DCM patients before and after IA/IgG therapy

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
27412778

