TITLE
Global transcriptional response of macrophage-like THP-1 cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Shiga toxins (Stxs) are bacterial cytotoxins produced by the enteric pathogens Shigella dysenteriae serotype 1 and some serotypes of Escherichia coli that cause bacillary dysentery and hemorrhagic colitis, respectively. To date, approaches to studying the capacity of Stxs to alter gene expression in intoxicated cells have been limited to individual genes. However, it is known that many of the signaling pathways activated by Stxs regulate the expression of multiple genes in mammalian cells. To expand the scope of analysis of gene expression and to better understand the underlying mechanisms for the various effects of Stxs on cell functions, we carried out comparative microarray analyses to characterize the global transcriptional response of human macrophage-like THP-1 cells to Shiga toxin type 1 (Stx1) and LPS. Data were analyzed using a rigorous combinatorial approach with three separate statistical algorithms. Thirty-six genes met the criteria of up-regulated expression in response to Stx1 treatment with 14 genes uniquely up-regulated by Stx1. Microarray data were validated by real time RT-PCR for genes encoding Egr-1 (transcriptional regulator), COX-2 (inflammation), and DUSP1, 5 and 10 (regulation of MAPK signaling). Stx1-mediated signaling through ERK1/2 and Egr-1 appears to be involved in the increased expression of the proinflammatory mediator TNF-α. Activation of COX-2 expression is associated with the increased production of proinflammatory and vasoactive eicosanoids. However, the capacity of Stx1 to increase the expression of genes encoding phosphatases suggests that mechanisms to dampen the macrophage proinflammatory response may be built into host response to the toxins.

DESIGN
Three separate experiments were performed for each of three treatment types: 3 untreated controls, 3 Stx-1 treated cell (400 ng/ml for 6h), 3 LPS-stimulated cells (200 ng/ml for 6h). Total RNA was isolated, processexc, and hybridized to a total of 9 Affymetrix human HG U133 arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
20351145

