TITLE
HDL suppresses the type I interferon response

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background: High density lipoprotein (HDL) protects the artery wall by removing cholesterol from lipid-laden macrophages. However, recent evidence suggests that it might also inhibit atherogenesis by combating inflammation. Methods and Results: To identify potential anti-inflammatory mechanisms, we challenged macrophages with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), an inflammatory microbial ligand for Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). HDL inhibited the expression of 33% (301 of 911) of the genes normally induced by LPS, microarray analysis revealed. One of its major targets was the type I interferon response pathway, a family of potent viral immunoregulators controlled by TLR4 and the TRAM/TRIF signaling pathway. Unexpectedly, HDL’s ability to inhibit gene expression was independent of cellular cholesterol stores. Moreover, it was unaffected by downregulation of two ATP-binding cassette transporters, ABCA1 and ABCG1, that promote cholesterol efflux. To examine the pathway’s potential in vivo relevance, we used mice deficient in apolipoprotein (apo) A-I, HDL’s major protein. After infection with Salmonella (a Gram-negative bacterium that expresses LPS), apoA-I–deficient mice had 6-fold higher plasma levels of interferon-beta-a key regulator of the type I interferon response than did wild-type mice. Conclusions: HDL inhibits a subset of LPS-stimulated macrophage genes that regulate the type I interferon response, and its action is independent of sterol metabolism. These findings raise the possibility that regulation of macrophage genes by HDL might link innate immunity and cardioprotection.

DESIGN
12 arrays, 3 experimental groups, mMncN (no treatment), mMncL (LPS treated, exposed for 4 h to serum-free medium or serum-free medium supplemented with 100 ng/mL of LPS), and mMwtL (HDL treated, Macrophages were treated for 4 h with serum-free medium or serum-free medium supplemented with 50 mg/mL of HDL, washed twice with PBS).

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
20974999

