TITLE
Doxorubicin resistance in a novel in vitro model of human pleomorphic liposarcoma associated with ALT

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Soft tissue sarcomas are a diverse set of fatal human tumors where few agents have demonstrable clinical efficacy, with the standard therapeutic combination of doxorubicin and ifosfamide showing only a 25-30% response rate in large multi-institutional trials. Although liposarcomas are the most common histological form of adult soft tissue sarcomas, research in this area is severely hampered by the lack of experimentally tractable in vitro model systems.  To this end, here we describe a novel in vitro model for human pleomorphic liposarcoma.  The cell line (LS2) is derived from a pleomorphic liposarcoma that utilizes Alternative Lengthening of Telomeres (ALT) mechanism of telomere maintenance, which may be particularly important in modulating the response of this tumor type to DNA damaging agents. We present detailed baseline molecular and genomic data, including genome wide copy number and transcriptome profiles, for this model compared to its parental tumor and a panel of liposarcomas covering multiple histologies.   The model has retained essentially all of the detectable alterations in copy number that are seen in the parental tumor, and shows molecular karyotypic and expression profiles consistent with pleomorphic liposarcomas.   We also demonstrate the utility of this model, together with two additional human liposarcoma cell lines, to investigate the relationship between topoisomerase 2A expression and the sensitivity of ALT-positive liposarcomas to doxorubicin. This model, together with its associated baseline data, provide a powerful new tool to develop treatments for this clinically poorly-tractable tumor, and to investigate the contribution that ALT makes to modulating sensitivity to DNA damaging chemotherapeutic agents such as doxorubicin.

DESIGN
Affymetrix U133 2.0 expression analyses were performed for 30 liposarcoma tumors, including 2 recurrences of 2 tumors. In addition, analyses were performed for three replicates of a tumor-derived cell line, LS2, as well as the tumor from which it was derived (5228). Finally, the Affymetrix Human Genome 50K DNA Mapping Array was used to determine copy number profiles for two Passages of LS2, as well as tumor 5228.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array GPL2005 [Mapping50K_Xba240] Affymetrix Human Mapping 50K Xba240 SNP Array

CITATIONS
20197395

MICROARRAYP
T
