TITLE
Normal and shortened photoperiods in liver, ovary, and pituitarty

ORGANISM
Oncorhynchus mykiss

SUMMARY
This study compared changes in gene expression in an oviparous female fish, the rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), under two different photoperiod treatments, a natural photoperiod (NP) and a shortened photoperiod (SP; 60% of NP). Gene expression in the liver, ovary and pituitary were measured at one-four week intervals over the course of the reproductive cycle in each treatment. Total RNA was harvested from these tissues, cDNA prepared, and hybridized on the 16K GRASP cDNA microarray. Established indices of reproductive development (ovulation, gonadosomatic index, mean oocyte diameter, and plasma hormone levels) were also measured. The SP fish failed to ovulate and their reproductive trajectory was clearly different from the NP group, which ovulated as expected. A comparative examination of the reproductive indices in both groups shows that ovarian development initiated in the SP group and proceeded relatively normally for about two-thirds of the reproductive cycle. Plasma follicle-stimulating hormone levels were higher in the SP fish from the cycle onset. This may have dampened E2 synthesis, preventing the positive feedback signal on the pituitary for the normal, rapid increase in luteinizing hormone late in the cycle.  Transcriptome analysis used an unsupervised k-means hierarchical clustering method to visualize changes in gene expression in the different organs from the NP fish that were assumed to represent the normal pattern leading to successful ovary development. In the NP, fish four, five, and six unique gene clusters were identified in the liver, ovary, and pituitary, respectively. These clusters ranged in size from 22 genes in one of the pituitary clusters to 302 genes in the liver.  These clusters were then applied to the SP fish to determine if and how they were altered.  The expression patterns of most genes in the SP fish were notably altered from the first time point. A SP in female rainbow trout initiated a rapid change in tr  anscript levels within the liver, ovary, and pituitary, leading to ovarian failure and apparently disrupting normal endocrine signaling between the pituitary and ovary.

DESIGN
Normal photoperiod: Two channel experiment; T=0 versus T= up to 330 days post spawn.  3 biological replicates for the later time points paired with a pooled laboratory standard t=0 control. One replicate per array Shortened photoperiod: Two channel experiment; T=0 versus T= up to 216 days post spawn.  3 biological replicates for the later time points paired with a pooled laboratory standard t=0 control. One replicate per array

PLATFORM
GPL2716 GRASP 16K version 2

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

