TITLE
Subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) gene expression patterns between weight control and regaining weight subjects

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Objective: This work aimed at identifying and characterizing differences in subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) gene expression patterns between subjects succeeding weight control against subjects regaining weight 6 months after a low calorie diet program. Methods: Weight-reduced obese subjects from 8 European countries were randomized into 4 diets differing in protein and glycemic index. In addition to the anthropometric and plasma parameters, SAT biopsies were taken at the beginning (CID2) and the end (CID3) of the weight maintenance intervention. Pan-genomic cDNA microarrays were used to define SAT gene expression profiles at both CID2 and CID3 of 22 subjects succeeding weight maintenance (successful subjects; mean weight change= -2.6 ± 1.2 kg) and 22 subjects regaining weight (unsuccessful subjects; mean weight change= 3.9 ± 1.3 kg) among the 4 dietary arms. Results: Differences in SAT gene expression patterns between successful and unsuccessful groups were mainly due to weight variations rather to differences in diet macronutrient composition. An ANCOVA analysis with total energy intake at CID3 as covariant led us to the definition of 1339 differential genes. Functional analysis of differential genes showed that cellular growth and proliferation, inflammation, cell death, cancer, cellular function and maintenance were the main biological processes involving these differential genes.

DESIGN
Overall design: SAT transcriptome was defined at the beginning (CID2) and at the end (CID3) of the dietary intervention program using a common reference design: Cyanine-5 dye was incorporated into all SAT samples, while a reference RNA pool made of the mix of commercial human liver, adipose tissue, and skeletal muscle RNA was labeled with cyanine-3 dye. Samples were hybridized to Agilent 44K whole human genome microarrays. Evolution in gene expression patterns after dietary intervention was tested in terms of the ratio after/before dietary intervention (CID3/CID2) ratio.

PLATFORM
GPL4133 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
20739421

