TITLE
Arp2/3 complex mutants show a pronounced lack of hyphal specific gene expression in Candida albicans

ORGANISM
Candida albicans

SUMMARY
Candida albicans is a diploid fungal pathogen lacking a defined complete sexual cycle, and thus has been refractory to standard forward genetic analysis. Instead, transcription profiling and reverse genetic strategies based on Saccharomyces cerevisiae have typically been used to link genes to functions. To overcome restrictions inherent in such indirect approaches, we have investigated a forward genetic mutagenesis strategy based on the UAU1 technology. We screened 4700 random insertion mutants for defects in hyphal development, and linked two new genes (ARP2 and VPS52) to hyphal growth. Deleting ARP2 abolished hyphal formation, generated round and swollen yeast phase cells, disrupted cortical actin patches and blocked virulence in mice. The mutants also showed a global lack of induction of hyphae-specific genes upon the yeast-to-hyphae switch. Surprisingly, both arp2Δ/Δ and arp2Δ/Δarp3Δ/Δ mutants were still able to endocytose FM4-64 and Lucifer Yellow, although as shown by time-lapse movies internalization of FM4-64 was somewhat delayed in mutant cells. Thus the non-essential role of the Arp2/3 complex discovered by forward genetic screening in C. albicans showed that uptake of membrane components from the plasma membrane to vacuolar structures is not dependent on this actin nucleating machinery.

DESIGN
By forward genetic screening, we have identified genes that are essential for hyphal formation. One of the hits is the Arp2/3 complex, which is essential for hyphal formation, but not for viability in Candida albicans. To gain insights into cellular processes affected by disrupting Arp2/3 complex functions, we performed transcriptional profiling under yeast growth conditions (YPD at 30°C for three hours) or hyphal induction (YPD + 10% FBS at 37°C for three hours) and compared transcriptional consequences of deleting ARP2 to MYO5 and SLA2 microarray data sets (Oberholzer et al., 2006).

PLATFORM
GPL6822 BRI-NRC C. albicans expression microarray

CITATIONS
20141603

