TITLE
Gene expression in Calu-3 cells after influenza H3N2 and H11N9 infection

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Airway epithelial cells are the initial site of infection with influenza viruses. The innate immune responses of airway epithelial cells to infection have the potential to limit virus replication and induce effective adaptive immune responses. However, relatively little is known about the importance of this innate anti-viral response to infection. Avian influenza viruses are a potential source of future pandemics, therefore it is critical to examine the effectiveness of the host anti-viral system to different influenza viruses. We used a human influenza (H3N2) and a low pathogenic avian influenza (H11N9) to assess and compare the anti-viral responses of bronchial epithelial cells (BECs). After infection, the H3N2 virus replicated more effectively than the H11N9 strain in BECs. This was not due to differential expression of different sialic acid residues on BECs but was attributed to the interference of the host anti-viral responses by H3N2. The H3N2 strain induced a delay in anti-viral signaling and impaired release of type I and type III interferons (IFNs) compared to the H11N9 virus. We then transfected the gene encoding for non-structural (NS) 1 protein into the BECs and the H3N2 NS1 induced a greater inhibition of anti-viral responses compared to the H11N9 NS1. While the low pathogenic avian influenza virus was capable of infecting BECs, the human influenza virus replicated more effectively than avian influenza virus in BECs and this may be at least in part due to a differential ability of the two NS1 proteins to inhibit anti-viral responses. This suggests that the subversion of human anti-viral responses may be an important requirement for influenza viruses to adapt to the human host and induce disease.

DESIGN
One (2hr) or three (6hr, 24hr) replicates of each infection (H3N2, H11N9) and two replicates of media control samples (24hr) were performed and hybridized onto the beadchip. The supplementary file 'GSE19580.non-normalized.txt' file contains non-normalized data for Samples GSM487974-GSM487989.

