TITLE
Genome-wide Ste12-binding site mapping in MATa segregants of YJM789 x S96 cross

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
In this study, we mapped for the first time differences in transcription binding among individuals and elucidated the genetic basis of such variation.  Whole-genome Ste12 binding profiles were determined using ChIP-Seq in pheromone-treated cells of 43 segregants of a cross between two highly diverged yeast strains, YJM789 and S288c as well as the parental lines. We identified extensive Ste12 binding variation among individuals and mapped underlying cis- and trans- acting loci responsible for such variation. We showed that the majority of TF binding variation is cis-linked and that many variations are associated with polymorphisms residing in the binding motifs of Ste12 as well as those of several known and proposed Ste12 cofactors. We also identified two trans factors, AMN1 and FLO8, that modulate Ste12 binding to promoters of more than 10 genes under α-factor treatment.  Neither of these two genes was known to regulate Ste12 previously, and we suggest that they may be key mediators of gene activity and phenotypic diversity.  Ste12 binding strongly correlates with gene expression for more than 200 genes indicating that binding variation is functional.  Many of the variable bound genes are involved in cell wall organization and biogenesis.  Overall, we identified key regulators of molecular diversity among individuals and provide novel insights into mechanisms of gene regulation.

DESIGN
Two ChIP-Seq experiments and one Input DNA-Seq experiment for the yeast strains S96, HS959 and 43 MATa segregants were performed under alpha factor treatment conditions; an additional replicate was also performed for some of the strains. One ChIP-Seq experiment for each parental strain was performed without alpha factor treatment, and one ChIP-Seq experiment for each of the 24 deletion strains was performed under alpha factor treatment.

PLATFORM
GPL9134 Illumina Genome Analyzer (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)

CITATIONS
20237471

