TITLE
Expression profiling of HeLa Tet-off cells expressing Flag-tagged version of WT NIPP1 or PP1 binding mutant of NIPP1.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
NIPP1, an established interactor of protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), is implicated in PRC2-mediated regulation of gene expression. Here, we explore whether PP1 associated with NIPP1 is involved in NIPP1-mediated regulation of genes. Therefore, we generated Hela Tet-off (HTO) cell lines that stably and inducibly express a Flag-tagged version of wild-type NIPP1 (HTO-NIPP1wt) or mutant NIPP1 (HTO_NIPP1m). The latter mutant lacks the major PP1 binding site by two point mutations in the RVXF-motif, an established PP1 - binding motif. All cell lines were derived from the same parental HeLa Tet-Off (HTO-PT) cell line which expresses only tTA transactivator and is used as a control. The Flag fusions were only expressed in the absence of doxycyline and at levels that were up to twofold higher than that of endogenous NIPP1. We performed a gene expression profiling of the HTO cell lines, using Whole Human Genome Oligo microarrays from Agilent. A Paired SAM analysis identified 1365 genes with an altered expression (P < 0.01) between the Flag-NIPP1 and parental cell lines. Importantly, only 185 genes were differentially expressed (P < 0.01) between the Flag-NIPP1m and parental cell lines. Even more strikingly, only 5% of the genes that were affected by the expression of Flag-NIPP1 also showed a significantly different expression in the Flag-NIPP1m cells. A similar small overlap was noted when the analysis was restricted to the 50 genes that were most upregulated or downregulated by the expression of Flag-NIPP1. Finally, scatter plot analysis revealed no significant correlation between the genes that were affected by the expression of Flag-NIPP1 or Flag-NIPP1m. Collectively, these data demonstrate that a moderate increase in the concentration of NIPP1 affects the expression of numerous genes by a mechanism that depends on associated PP1.

DESIGN
In total 12 samples were processed. Three different cell lines were analysed: HTO_parental, HTO_NIPP1wt and HTO_NIPP1m. For each cell line 4 replicates were obtained. The HTO_parental cell line is the control cell line. For the HTO_NIPP1wt the 4 replicates were obtained from two replicates of two different transgenic cell lines expressing FlagNIPP1wt (cell line wt n°1 and 2). Each cell line derived from the same parental control cell line.

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
20671031

