TITLE
Targeting resistance to Smoothened antagonists by inhibiting the PI3K pathway

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Mutations in Hedgehog (Hh) pathway genes, leading to constitutive  activation of Smoothened (Smo), occur in sporadic medulloblastoma, the most common brain cancer in children. Antagonists of Smo induce tumor regression in mouse models of medulloblastoma and hold great promise for targeted therapy for this tumor. However, acquired resistance has emerged as one of the major challenges of targeted cancer therapy. Here, we describe novel mechanisms of acquired resistance to Smo antagonists in medulloblastoma. NVP-LDE225, a potent and selective Smo antagonist, inhibits Hh signaling and induces tumor regressions in allograft models of medulloblastoma that are driven by mutations of Patched (Ptch), a tumor suppressor in the Hh pathway. However, after long-term treatment, evidence of acquired resistance was observed. Genome-wide profiling of resistant tumors revealed distinct mechanisms to evade the inhibitory effects of Smo antagonists. Chromosomal amplification of Gli2, a downstream effector of Hh signaling, reactivated Hh signaling and restored tumor growth. Analysis of pathway gene-expression signatures selectively deregulated in resistant tumors identified increased phosphoinosite-3-kinase (PI3K) signaling as another potential resistance mechanism. Probing the functional relevance of increased PI3K signaling, we showed that the combination of NVP-LDE225 with the dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 markedly delayed the development of resistance. Our findings have important clinical implications for future treatment strategies in medulloblastoma.

DESIGN
mRNA profiling: RNA was prepared from tumours from vehicle or NVP-LDE225 treated nude mice allografted with medulloblastoma tumors derived from Ptch+/-p53-/- transgenic mouse and hybridized on Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 RNA expression array. The dosage terminology (BID & QD) reflects the dosing schedule, where BID = twice a day, QD = once a day. aCGH: DNA was prepared from tumors from vehicle or NVP-LDE225 treated nude mice allografted with medulloblastoma tumors derived from Ptch+/-p53-/- transgenic mouse and hybridized on Agilent mouse CGH 244K Array.

