TITLE
A transcriptomic approach to elucidate apricot fruit development using an oligonucleotide peach microarray

ORGANISM
Prunus persica ; Prunus armeniaca

SUMMARY
The aim of this study was to elucidate the potential use of microarray technology, developed in model species, in related, yet phenotypically distinct, species where few or no information are available. Considering the high degree of sequence conservation within the Rosaceae family and, in particular, among the Prunus species we employed the first available peach oligonucleotide microarray (µPEACH 1.0) for studying the transcrptomic profile during apricot fruit development (Prunus armeniaca L., cv. 'Goldrich'). Fruit material was harvested at three distinct stages, corresponding to immature-green stage (6 weeks before fully-ripe stage), mature-firm-ripe stage (change of peel color, 1 week before fully-ripe stage) and at fully-ripe stage and designated as S1, S2 and S3 stages, respectively.  Apricot targets cDNA, when applied the  µPEACH1.0, were showing significant hybridization with an average of 43% of spotted targets validating the use of μPEACH1.0 to profile the transcriptome of apricot fruit during development and ripening.  Microarray analysis carried out on immature and ripe peach and apricot  fruit separately pointed out that 70% of genes differentially expressed was detectable the same pattern of expression in both species. This result indicates that the transcriptome of immature and ripe fruit are quite similar in apricot and peach, but also highlighted the presence of transcript changes specie-specific. When μPEACH1.0 was used to profile apricot developing fruit were identified 400 and 74 genes differetially expressed  during the transition from S1 to S2 stage and from S2 to S3 stage, respectively.  Intriguingly, a considerable number of auxin action regulators (AUX/IAA) and of genes coding heat shock proteins (hsp) were highly up-regulated at the onset and late of ripening phase, respectively.The comparison between the expression profiles of these apricot genes and their peach hortologues showed a similar pattern for AUX/IAA and quite different for hsps. This result suggests a similar role for AUX/IAA in both species and a more important involvement for hsps in the apricot fruit ripening.

DESIGN
A direct comparison approach has been used to investigate changes at the transcriptional level in immature (S1, 45 days after full bloom), mature-firm ripe (S2, 80 DAFB) and fully ripe (S3, 87 DAFB) fruit of apricot (Prunus armeniaca, cv Goldrich). The comparison was carried out also for immature (S1) and ripe (S4) fruit of peach (Prunus persica cv Fantasia).  RNA has been extracted from fruit harvest at above mentionated stages of development.  At least four hybridization have been conducted for a total of four technical replicates (with dye-swap).

PLATFORM
GPL8584 Prunus persica 5.7K microPEACH1.0

CITATIONS
George A. Manganaris, Angela Rasori, Daniele Bassi, Filippo Geuna, Angelo Ramina, Pietro Tonutti and Claudio Bonghi. Comparative transcript profiling of apricot (Prunus armeniaca L.) fruit development and on-tree ripening. Tree Genetics & Genomes. 2011; 1-8.

