TITLE
Expression profiling analysis of thymus and brain from EMP3 mutant mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background: Epithelial membrane protein 3 (EMP3) was previously reported to be involved in immunological reactions and in tumor as potential suppressor, as well as a candidate gene for cardiac dystrophic calcification (DCC). Given its assumed role in different disorders, we aimed to generate and perform a generalized phenotypic screening of EMP3-knockout mice. Materials and Methods: TaconicArtemis used knockout-targeting strategy and generated knockout mice for EMP3. Large-scale phenotype screens were performed at the German Mouse Clinic (GMC) to obtain a standardized and comprehensive way of phenotype. The phenotype screens involved tests for nearly 320 parameters in different screening areas such as: dysmorphology, behavior, neurology, eye, nociception, energy metabolism, clinical chemistry and hematology, immunology, allergy, steroid metabolism, cardiovascular and lung function and pathology. For DCC, screening was performed in our laboratory using the freeze-thaw injury method. Results: Here, we report on the phenotype of EMP3 knockout. EMP3-KO mice are viable and fertile. Under baseline conditions, an aberrant immunological phenotype was found with nearly 70% penetrance in mutant male mice. Specifically, a lower frequency of T cells and an inverse trend in B cells was observed. Also a higher frequency of B cells was seen in female mutant mice. For all the remaining screening, no genotype-specific differences were found. Also no calcification deposits were found in the EMP3-KO mice as response to injury. In addition we reviewed and discussed the strong role of EMP3 in apoptosis and tumor. Therefore, further analysis of EMP3 as tumor suppressor gene in EMP3-KO mice required investigation under challenging conditions. Conclusion: Large-scale phenotypic screening suggests a role of EMP3 under basal conditions in immunity. Differences in the proportion of various leukocyte subsets from the corresponding wild type were found. Further investigation is ongoing to demonstrate the role of EMP3 as tumor suppressor in a sensitized model. Finally, we excluded the EMP3 gene as candidate gene for DCC on the C57BL/6 genetic background.

DESIGN
Thymus and brain of four mutant animals of the EMP3 mutant mice versus a pool of four reference (wildtype) mice; two technical replicates for each mutant mouse including a dye swap experiment - in total 8 chip hybridisations for each of the analysed organs

