TITLE
Location-specific responses to thermal stress in larvae of the reef-building coral Montastraea faveolata

ORGANISM
Orbicella faveolata

SUMMARY
The potential to adapt to a changing climate depends in part upon the standing genetic variation present in wild populations. In corals, the dispersive larval phase is particularly vulnerable to the effects of environmental stress. Larval survival and response to stress during dispersal and settlement will play a key role in the persistence of coral populations. To test the hypothesis that larval transcription profiles reflect population specific responses to thermal stress, symbiont-free gametes of the scleractinian coral Montastraea faveolata were collected from Florida and Mexico and raised under normal and elevated temperatures. These populations have been shown to exchange larvae frequently enough to prevent significant differentiation of neutral loci. Differences among thousands of genes were simultaneously characterized using microarrays, allowing investigation of gene expression patterns among wild populations under stressful environmental conditions. Results show site-specific signatures of gene expression in larvae of a reef-building coral from different parts of its range (despite low genetic divergence), and reveal both local and general components of stress response during later stages of larval development. These results provide evidence of site-specific variation in the face of gene flow, which may represent functional genetic variation in different subpopulations, and support the idea that coral host genomes may indeed house the adaptive potential needed to deal with changing environmental conditions.

DESIGN
The experimental setup followed a reference design, i.e. all samples were hybridized against the same pool made up of equal amounts of RNA from all samples collected in Mexico. For samples from Mexico we used three technical replicates for each treatment temperature, for samples from Florida three biological replicates were used for each treatment temperature, except for the high temperature samples at day two where only two replicates were available due to high larval mortality at that temperature. Common reference samples were labeled with Cy3, temperature treatment samples with Cy5. Microarrays for M. faveolata contained 1,314 coding sequences, of which 43% had functional annotations as determined by homology to known genes.

