TITLE
Evolutionarily conserved replication timing profiles distinguish cell types and predict long range chromatin interaction

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Extensive changes in replication timing occur during early mouse development, but their biological significance remains uncertain. To identify evolutionarily conserved features of replication timing and their relationships to epigenetic properties in humans, we profiled replication timing genome-wide in four human embryonic stem cell (hESC) lines, hESC-derived neural precursor cells (NPCs), lymphoblastoid cells, and two independently derived human induced pluripotent stem cell lines (hiPSCs). Results confirm the conservation of coordinately replicated megabase-sized units of chromosomes (replication domains) with stable cell type specific molecular boundaries that consolidate into larger replication domains during differentiation. Replication timing changes encompassed units of 400-800 kb and were coordinated with changes in transcription similar to mouse. Moreover, significant cell-type specific conservation of replication timing profiles was observed across regions of conserved synteny, despite significant species variation in the alignment of replication timing to isochore GC/LINE-1 content. Replication profiling also revealed a closer genome-wide epigenetic alignment of hESCs to mouse epiblast-derived stem cells (mEpiSCs) than to mouse ESCs. Finally, we identify a signature of chromatin modifications marking the boundaries of early replicating domains and a remarkably strong link between spatial proximity of chromatin as measured by Hi-C analysis and replication timing. Together, our results reveal evolutionarily conserved elements of the replication program in mammalian early development, demonstrate the power of replication profiling to identify important epigenetic distinctions between closely related stem cell populations (e.g. ESCs vs. EpiSCs), and strengthen the hypothesis that replication domains are structural and functional units of 3D chromosomal architecture.

DESIGN
8 cell types, with a total of 13 individual replicates (i.e. 5 in duplicates, 3 in single replicates)

PLATFORM
GPL9973 FSU/NimbleGen Human 2.1M Whole Genome Tiling

CITATIONS
20430782

