TITLE
RAW264.7 gene expression after exposure to 1-50ug/ml AF-SWCNT-24 hours

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) are being explored and used for a wide range of applications in industrial and medical sectors, and the increasing exposure of SWCNTs necessitate the studies of their potential environmental and health effects. Considerable efforts have been made to improve the dispersion of SWCNTs by chemical modifications. The present study was designed to determine if the acid functionalization of SWCNTs enhanced the toxicity and more efforts were made to understand the molecular mechanisms. RAW264.7 cells were exposed to 0-100μg/mL of SWCNTs and AF-SWCNTs for 24 hours and cell proliferation, viability, and gene expression profiles were assessed and compared. Results showed that the magnitude of AF-SWCNT-induced cell proliferation inhibition was higher than that of SWCNTs. 10μg/mL of AF-SWCNTs was determined as non-toxic to cells by viability analysis. AF-SWCNTs could enter and aggregate in cell cytoplasm and nuclear areas. Microarray, real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) demonstrated that AF-SWCNTs (1, 10, and 50μg/mL) altered gene and protein expression patterns. The most differentially expressed genes were related to pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (such as CCL-3 and CCL-4), apoptosis (e.g., Caspase-1, -4, and Dffa), protective response (such as Hmox-1and GSTM3), and cell surface molecules such as ICAM-1, Itgb2, indicating a possible involvement of SWCNT in inflammation, anti-apoptotic and DNA fragmentation, carcinogenesis and biased T cell polarization. Furthermore, a substantial amount of down-regulated genes were found related to ribosomal assembly and mitochondrial respiration chain, implicating a possible mechanism of SWCNT-induced oxidative stress and gene expression inhibition.

DESIGN
RAW264.7 gene expression after exposure to 1-50ug/ml AF-SWCNT-24 hours. 0ug/ml of AF-SWCNT was used as control sample. The data were obtained from three biological replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL8799 36K_mouse_genome_array V4.0 GPL9961 32K_Mouse_Genome_Array_gene list

CITATIONS
21486190

