TITLE
Sex bias and dosage compensation in the zebra finch versus chicken genomes: general and specialized patterns among birds

ORGANISM
Taeniopygia guttata

SUMMARY
We have performed a comparison of global patterns of gene expression between two bird species, the chicken and zebra finch, especially with regard to sex bias of autosomal vs. Z chromosome genes, dosage compensation and evolution of sex bias. Both species appear to lack a Z chromosome-wide mechanism of dosage compensation, because both have a similar pattern of significantly higher expression of Z genes in males relative to females. Unlike the chicken Z chromosome, which has female-specific expression of the non-coding RNA MHM (male hypermethylated), and acetylation of histone 4 lysine 16 (H4K16) near MHM, the zebra finch Z chromosome appears to lack the MHM sequence and acetylation of H4K16. The zebra finch also does not show the reduced male to female (M:F) ratio of gene expression near MHM similar to that found in the chicken. Although the M:F ratios of Z chromosome gene expression are similar across tissues and ages within each species, they differ between the two species. Z genes showing the greatest species difference in M:F ratio were concentrated near the MHM region of the chicken Z chromosome. The current study shows that the zebra finch differs from the chicken because it lacks a specialized region of greater dosage compensation along the Z chromosome, and shows dosage compensation for a different set of Z genes than the chicken. These patterns suggest that different avian taxa may have evolved specific compensatory mechanisms.

DESIGN
Experimental groups: Post-hatch Days 1, 25, 45, and 90+ for both Females and Males (d1_F, d1_M, d25_F, d25_M, d45_F, d45_M, adult_F, adult_M). Biological replicates: 6 per group. One test developmental stage subject and one universal SoNG reference (pooled Taeniopygia guttata brain) per array.

PLATFORM
GPL9554 Songbird Neurogenomics Initiative 20K Array

CITATIONS
20357053

