TITLE
In utero and lactational exposure to TCDD induces disruption of prostate glands and fibrosis in rhesus monkeys

ORGANISM
Macaca mulatta

SUMMARY
[Original title] In utero and lactational exposure to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) induces disruption of the prostate glands and fibrosis in rhesus monkeys. We investigated the effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) exposure on the prostate in rhesus monkey offspring.  Dams received 0, 30 or 300 ng/kg TCDD subcutaneously on Day 20 of gestation, and then 5% of the initial dose was injected every 30 days until Day 90 after delivery.  The offspring were maintained until reaching sexual maturity, and examined histopathologically.  Dose-dependent decreases in the prostate glands and widespread fibrosis were observed in offspring.  It is noteworthy that 7 years from the final lactational TCDD exposure, inflammatory cell infiltration and disruption of the prostate glands were also observed.  Differential mRNA expression associated with fibrosis, inflammatory response and disruption of cell components were demonstrated by microarray analysis, and up-regulation of TGM4, TGFB1, COL1A1 and MMP2 was confirmed with Real-time PCR.  In conclusion, in utero and lactational exposure to TCDD induced dose-proportional prostatic fibrosis, indicating prostatic dysfunction and inducible semen quality reduction in second-generation rhesus monkeys.

DESIGN
Dam received 0, 30 or 300 ng/kg TCDD subcutaneously on Day 20 of gestation, and then 5% of the initial dose was injected every 30 days until Day 90 after delivery.  The offspring were maintained until reaching sexual maturity, and the prostates from 3 offspring in each group were evalutated by histopathological examination, microarray analysis and Real-time quantitative PCR. Supplementary file: Fold_change comparison results of 'control group vs 30 ng/kg group' and 'control group vs 300 ng/kg group'.

PLATFORM
GPL9861 Agilent-015421 Rhesus Macaque Gene Expression Microarray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
20067830

