TITLE
Hippocampus of HuD overexpressor mice. Perrone-Bizzozero-5R01NS030255-12

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Post-transcriptional mechanisms play an important role in the control of gene expression. RNA-binding proteins are key players in the post-transcriptional control of many neural genes and they participate in multiple processes, from RNA splicing and mRNA transport to mRNA stability and translation. Our laboratory has developed the first mouse model overexpressing a RNA-binding protein, the ELAV-like protein HuD, in the CNS under the control of the CaMKinII alpha promoter. Initial behavioral characterization of the mice revealed that they had significant learning deficits together with abnormalities in prepulse inhibition (PPI). At the molecular level, we found that the expression of the growth-associated protein GAP-43, one of the targets of HuD, was increased in the hippocampus of HuD transgenic mice. To characterize these mice further and to evaluate the utility of these animals in understanding human diseases, we propose to use DNA microarray methods. To test our hypothesis we propose 2 specific aims: 1)To characterize the pattern of gene expression in the hippocampus of HuD overexpressor mice 2)To compare the pattern of gene expression in our mouse model with that in the hippocampus of rats prenatally exposed to alcohol (FAS model) and in post-mortem tissues of patients with schizophrenia Based on the behavioral and molecular properties of our HuD transgenic mice we hypothesize that these animals may be good models for the studying the basis of learning disabilities and of diseases that show deficits in PPI such as fetal alcohol syndrome and schizophrenia. All mice are in C57BL/6 background and are male approximately 60 days old. Initial studies were performed in animals that were not subjected to any experimental manipulation. Animals were bred and sacrificed according to our approved animal protocol.  The brain was rapidly dissected on ice and we isolated the hippocampus, which has the highest expression of the transgene. After dissection both hippocampi were frozen in liquid nitrogen, pooled and stored at -80C until analysis. RNA samples were isolated using RNAeasy Qiagen columns. For our first experiment, we want to examine the pattern of gene expression in the hippocampus of 3 transgenic mice and 3 non-transgenic littermates. RNAs from the 6 hippocampi were of high quality as revealed by the integrity of the 28S and 18S rRNA. We will provide 6 samples containing 10 ug of RNA each in DEPC water at a concentration of about 0.5 ug/ul. Three of the samples (#1, #2 and # 3) are from transgenic mice and three from their non-transgenic littermates (#4, #5 and #6). Keywords: other

PLATFORM
GPL81 [MG_U74Av2] Affymetrix Murine Genome U74A Version 2 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

