TITLE
Global responses of Aliivibrio salmonicida to hydrogen peroxide

ORGANISM
Aliivibrio salmonicida LFI1238

SUMMARY
Aliivibrio salmonicida causes “cold-water vibriosis” (or “Hitra disease”) in fish, including marine-reared Atlantic salmon. During development of the disease the bacterium will encounter macrophages with antibacterial activities such as production of damaging reactive oxygen species (ROS). To defend itself the bacterium will presumably start producing detoxifying enzymes, reducing agents, and proteins involved in DNA and protein repair systems. Even though responses to oxidative stress are well studied for a few model bacteria, little work has been done in general to explain how important groups of pathogens, like members of the Vibrionaceae family, can survive at high levels of ROS. We have used bioinformatic tools and an –omics approach to study how A. salmonicida responds to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). First, we used the recently published genome sequence to predict potential binding sites for OxyR (H2O2 response regulator). The computer-based search identified OxyR sites associated with 20 single genes and 8 operons, and these predictions were compared to experimental data from Northern blot analysis, microarray analysis and 2D gel electrophoresis. In general, OxyR binding site predictions and experimental results are in agreement. Up- and down-regulated genes are distributed among all functional gene categories, but a striking number of ≥2 fold up-regulated genes encode proteins involved in detoxification or DNA protection and repair, are part of reduction systems, or are involved in carbon metabolism and regeneration of NADH/NADPH. Our predictions and –omics data corroborates well with findings from other model bacteria, but also suggest species-specific gene regulation.

DESIGN
Two-condition experiment, cells grown in LB medium (control samples) vs. cells grown under oxidative stress (H2O2) (stimulated samples). Samples collected from three different timepoints (15, 30 and 60 min). Technical replicates for each timepoint: 3 control, 3 stimulated, independently grown and harvested. One replicate per array.

PLATFORM
GPL9985 Vibrio salmonicida 5.5K V1.0.1 AROS

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

