TITLE
DHA supplementation suppresses LDLR and OLR1 gene expression in blood cells from hypertriglyceridemic men

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Previously published results from our double-blind, placebo-controlled parallel study with docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) supplementation (3 g/d, 90 d) to hypertriglyceridemic men (39-66yr) showed that DHA reduced several risk factors for cardiovascular disease (CVD), including the plasma concentration of inflammatory markers. To determine the effect of DHA supplementation on the global gene expression pattern, we performed Affymetrix GeneChip microarray analysis of blood cells (treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or vehicle) drawn before and after the supplementation from the hyperlipidemic men who participated in the previous study. Genes that were significantly differentially regulated by the LPS treatment and DHA supplementation were identified. Differential regulation of 18 genes was then confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR. Both microarray and qRT-PCR data showed that the expression of LDL receptor (LDLR), oxidized LDL receptor (OLR1), and cathepsin L1 (CTSL) was significantly suppressed by DHA supplementation; however, LPS stimulated the expression of LDLR and CTSL but not that of OLR1. LPS up-regulated and DHA suppressed the expression of prostaglandin E synthase (PTGES), PPAR delta, and various chemokines. Enrichment with Gene Ontology categories demonstrated that the genes related to transcription factor activity, immune responses, host defense responses, inflammatory responses, and apoptosis were inversely regulated by LPS and DHA. These results provide supporting evidence for the anti-inflammatory effects of DHA supplementation, and reveal previously unrecognized genes that are regulated by DHA, and are associated with risk factors of cardiovascular diseases.

DESIGN
Double-blind, placebo-controlled parallel study with DHA supplementation to hypertriglyceridemic men. Gene expression detected in LPS-stimulated (LPS) and unstimulated (vehicle) white blood cells. 3-4 replicates per group.

