TITLE
Canine normal tissue gene expression profiles

ORGANISM
Canis lupus familiaris

SUMMARY
Our understanding of disease is increasingly informed by changes in gene expression between normal and abnormal tissues.  The release of the canine genome sequence in 2005 provided an opportunity to understand health and disease in the dog using investigative techniques including gene expression profiling.  Accordingly, we now present a publicly accessible canine normal tissue gene expression database that will streamline the study of canine tissues and facilitate comparative genomic analysis with other mammals.  The Affymetrix platform was utilized to catalogue the genetic signatures of normal canine tissues including:  liver, kidney, heart, lung, cerebrum, lymph node, spleen, jejunum, pancreas and skeletal muscle.  The quality of the database was assessed in several ways.  Organ defining gene sets were identified for each tissue and functional enrichment analysis revealed themes consistent with known physio-anatomic functions for each organ.  In addition, a comparison of orthologous gene expression between matched canine and human normal tissues uncovered remarkable similarity. Public access and use of this data, using infrastructure identical to that currently in use for human normal tissues, has been established and allows for additional cross-species comparisons.  To demonstrate the utility of this dataset, novel canine gene annotations were established based on comparative analysis of dog and human tissue selective gene expression and manual curation of canine probeset mapping. It is expected that this dataset will contribute to more advanced study of disease in the dog and biologically robust biomedical studies that utilize the dog as a model for translational research.

DESIGN
39 pathologically normal organ samples were collected from four dogs, 10 organs from each dog.  Organ samples included the pancreas, kidney, liver, lung, heart, skeletal muscle, jejunum, cerebrum, spleen and peripheral lymph node.

PLATFORM
GPL3738 [Canine_2] Affymetrix Canine Genome 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21655323

