TITLE
Gene expression profie of OSMF (Oral Submucous Fibrosis) tissues compared with the expression in normal oral tissues

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
ABSTRACT: Background: Oral Submucous Fibrosis (OSF) is a chronic inflammatory disease   resulting in progressive fibrosis of the oral soft tissues.  Habit of   chewing betel quid has been proposed as an important etiological factor in   the development of this disease. But the exact mechanism of pathogenesis is   still not clear. Methods: We took microarray approach to identify differentially regulated   genes in 10 OSF tissues against 8 pooled normal tissues using   oligonucleotide arrays.  Microarray results have been confirmed by qRT-PCR.   Regulation of genes in epithelial and fibroblast cells was studied after   treatment with arecoline, TGF-b and LAP followed by qRT-PCR. Results: Total number of genes found to be commonly regulated in OSF   (p < =0.05 and Fold change > =1.5) tissues are 5288 and among them 2884 are   up-regulated and 2404 are down-regulated. Extra cellular matrix genes that   have been reported in OSF such as collagens, fibronectin and cytokines ET1,   CTGF and TGF-b1 are among the up regulated genes.  The list of up and down   regulated genes also includes RARRES1, TGM2, THBS1, CHGB, MMP3, SPP1 and   ALOX12, C4orf7 respectively.  Analysis of microarray data revealed TGF-?   pathway as a principal gene network involved in the development of OSF.   Intriguingly, there was no regulation of CTGF and THBS1 in fibroblasts by   arecoline.  However, TGF-b1 treatment regulated all these genes in both   epithelial and fibroblast cells. Conclusion: We demonstrate over expression of novel genes in OSF and suggest   that OSF development involves TGF-b pathway in an epithelial-stromal   cooperation.  Targeting TGF-b signaling could be an alternate strategy to   treat OSF.

DESIGN
Two-condition experiment: 10 OSF tissues against 8 pooled normal tissues

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
21591998

