TITLE
Novel Target Genes Regulated By LEUNIG

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Regulation of homeotic gene expression is critical for proper developmental patterns in plants. The Arabidopsis thaliana floral homeotic gene AGAMOUS is regulated by LEUNIG (LUG). Mutations in LUG result in homeotic transformations of floral organ identity. LUG mutants also exhibit other defects that are independent of AG, including abnormal carpel and ovule development, reduced female and male fertility, and narrower leaves and floral organs, suggesting that LUG has a wider role in development. LUG is structurally similar to the transcription co-repressors Tup1 (S. cerevisiae) and Groucho (Drosophila), suggesting developmental pathways regulated by LUG may be controlled by a conserved eukaryotic repression mechanism. We aim to determine novel target genes regulated by LUG using transcriptome analysis. A mutant lug-3 line has been obtained from Dr. Zhongchi Liu. This line was used in the initial studies of LUG in the Meyerowitz lab. Lug-3 is a strong allele in the Lansberg erecta background, caused by a nonsense mutation that results in early termination of the protein and is likely null. The Lug-3 mutant exhibits narrow floral organs with staminoid petals and carpelloid sepals, abnormal carpel and ovule development, reduced plant height, increased lateral branching and narrow and smaller leaves. We proposed to use the lug-3 line in elucidating the role of LUG as a potential general regulator of transcription in Arabidopsis. mRNA populations will be isolated from wild type (Ler) and lug-3 plants that have produced inflorescence. This stage of development has been selected for several reasons. Firstly, mRNA populations from the widest range of tissue types from a single plant can be collected. Secondly, as AGAMOUS, which is involved in the regulation of floral development, is present in the Affymetrix gene chip, it will provided an excellent internal control to monitor between chips. Results will demonstrate whether LUG is likely to have a more global role in regulating transcription, and will identify pathways under the regulation of this co-repressor-like protein.

DESIGN
12 samples were used in this experiment.

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

