TITLE
Arabidopsis thaliana/Phytophthora parasitica compatible interaction transcriptome

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Oomycetes from the genus Phytophthora are fungus-like plant pathogens that are devastating for agriculture and natural ecosystems. Due to particular physiological characteristics, no treatments against diseases caused by oomycetes are presently available. To develop such treatments, it appears essential to dissect the molecular mechanisms that determine the interaction between Phytophthora species and host plants. The present project is focused on the molecular mechanisms that underlie the compatible plant-oomycete interaction and plant disease. The laboratory developed a novel interaction system involving the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, and Phytophthora parasitica, a soil-borne pathogen infecting a wide host range, thus representing the majority of Phytophthora species. A characteristic feature of the compatible Arabidopsis/P. parasitica interaction is an extended biotrophic phase, before infection becomes necrotrophic. Because the initial biotrophic phase is extremely short on natural (e.g. solanaceous) hosts, the Arabidopsis system provides the opportunity to analyze, for both interaction partners, the molecular events that determine the initiation of infection and the switch to necrotrophy. The present project aims at analyzing the compatible interaction between A. thaliana roots and P. parasitica. The Affymetrix A. thaliana full genome chip will be used to characterize modulations of the transcriptome occurring over a period of 24h from the onset of plant root infection to the beginning of necrotrophy. Parallel to this study, a custom-designed P. parasitica biochip will enable analyzing of P. parasitica gene expression during the same stages.

DESIGN
10 samples were used in this experiment.

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

