TITLE
Altered gene expression is associated with age-dependent memory impairment

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The mechanisms underlying age-associated memory impairment are  not well understood.  We have shown that the onset of memory disturbances in the aging brain is associated with altered hippocampal chromatin plasticity. During learning, aged mice display a specific deregulation of histone H4 lysine 12 (H4K12) acetylation. To analyze if deregulated H4K12 acetylation impacts on learning-induced gene-expression required for memory consolidation we performed a high-density oligonucleotide microarray to compare the entire hippocampal gene-expression profile of 3 and 16-month-old mice during memory consolidation.

DESIGN
In order to identify genes differentially regulated between 3- and 16-month old mice upon fear conditioning we subjected 3- and 16-month old mice  to fear conditioning (4 mice each group, total 8 mice) . Mice of the same age that were handled but not subjected to any of the employed behavior paradigms served as control  (4 mice 3-month old and 4 mice 16-month old, total 8 mice). During fear conditioning mice are subjected to a novel context  followed by a mild electric foot-shock (context-shock exposure). In order to identify genes that are differentially regulated upon fear conditioning and are specific to associative learning we also tested the hippocampal gene-expression profile of  3-month old mice subjected to the same context-exposure that is not followed by a foot-shock (Context-exposure) (4 mice) or receive an immediate foot shock once they are placed in the context and only afterwards are allowed to explore the context (shock-context exposure) (4 mice). In order to identify genes that are regulated upon fear conditioning and are specific to associative learning we compared the hippocampal gene-expression profile of mice subjected to fear conditioning (context-shock), context or shock-context exposure regarding to their age-matched control mice (3 month old) mentioned above (control). Hippocampi from each mice were tested resulting to 24 samples which were separately hybridized (OneColor Array Design).

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
20448184

