TITLE
Skeletal muscle gene expression in twin-pairs discordant for their physical activity for over 30 years

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The high physical activity/high aerobic fitness phenotype predicts low morbidity and mortality more strongly than any other known biological risk factor. Inherited and/or acquired properties of skeletal muscle seem to be linked with aerobic fitness and other cardio-metabolic risk factors3. However, physical activity-induced changes in muscle and fat tissue-related complex molecular networks and their links with cardio-metabolic disease risk are not comprehensively understood. Here we show that among the physically active members of twin pairs, as compared to their inactive co-twins, gene expression in musculus vastus lateralis tissue samples is chronically up-regulated for the central pathways or genes related to energy metabolism, including oxidative phosphorylation, lipid metabolism and supportive metabolic pathways. In addition to aerobic fitness, upregulation of these pathways is associated in particular with high HDL cholesterol levels. In fat tissue we found physical activity-induced increases in polyunsaturated fatty acid metabolism and in branched chain amino acid degradation, which increases were associated with decreased ‘high-risk’ ectopic body fat and low glucose levels. Consistent with other findings plasma lipidomics analyses showed up-regulation of the triacylglycerols containing the polyunsaturated fatty acids. The findings indicate the main pathways in skeletal muscle and fat tissue that mediate the chronic effects of physical activity on reduced cardio-metabolic disease risk, including the increase in aerobic fitness. Up-regulation of oxidative energy metabolism seems to be a common underlying mechanism.

DESIGN
Total RNA obtained from the biopsy samples of m. vastus lateralis from three mono- and seven dizygotic twin pairs that had been  followed for their discordance for physical avtivity for 32 years.

PLATFORM
GPL6884 Illumina HumanWG-6 v3.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
20862330

