TITLE
Role of the global transcriptional regulator PrrA in R. sphaeroides 2.4.1

ORGANISM
Rhodobacter sphaeroides 2.4.1

SUMMARY
We performed microarray analyses to investigate the extent of genes regulated by the Prr system. We compared the transcriptome and proteome profiles of the wild type (WT) and mutant PrrA2 cells grown anaerobically, in the dark, with DMSO as electron acceptor.  Approximately 25% of the genes present in the genome are PrrA-regulated, at the transcriptional level, either directly or indirectly, by ≥ 2-fold relative to wild type.  The genes affected are widespread throughout all COG functional categories, with previously unsuspected “metabolic” genes affected when in the PrrA mutant background.  PrrA was found to act both as an activator and a repressor of transcription, with more genes being repressed in the presence of PrrA (9:5 ratio).  An analysis of the genes encoding the 1,536 peptides detected through our chromatographic study, which corresponds to 36% coverage of the genome, revealed that approximately 20% of the genes encoding these proteins were positively regulated, whereas approximately 32% were negatively regulated by PrrA, which is in excellent agreement with the percentages obtained for the whole genomic transcriptome profile.  In addition, comparison of the transcriptome and proteome mean parameter values chosen between WT and PrrA2 showed good qualitative agreement, indicating that transcript regulation paralleled the corresponding protein abundance.  The microarray analysis was validated by direct mRNA measurement of randomly selected, both positively and negatively regulated genes.  lacZ transcriptional and kan translational fusions enabled us to map putative PrrA binding sites, as well as revealing gene targets for indirect regulation by PrrA.

DESIGN
WT R. sphaeroides 2.4.1 and the PrrA2 mutant were grown in 800 ml of medium in 1-liter glass bottles under anaerobic conditions until the optical density at 600 nm (OD600) reached approximately 0.4. RNA was isolated from a 50-ml aliquot of the culture. The experiment was performed in quadruplicate independent cultures, and three cultures were subsequently selected.

PLATFORM
GPL162 [uwyRhodo1a] Rhodobacter sphaeroides 2.4.1 GeneChip

CITATIONS
18487335

