TITLE
BES performance of S. oneidensis pure- and co-culture

ORGANISM
Shewanella oneidensis MR-1

SUMMARY
Bioelectrochemical systems employing mixed microbial communities as biocatalysts are gaining importance as potential renewable energy, bioremediation, or biosensing devices. While we are beginning to understand how individual microorganism species interact with an electrode as electron donor, not much is known about the interactions between different microbial species in a community. Here, we compare the bioelectrochemical performance of Shewanella oneidensis in a pure-culture and in a co-culture with the homolactic acid fermenter Lactococcus lactis. While S. oneidensis alone can only use lactate as electron donor for current production, the co-culture is able to convert glucose into current with a similar coulombic efficiency of approximately 17%, respectively. With (electro)-chemical analysis and transcription profiling, we found that the BES performance and S. oneidensis physiology were not significantly different whether grown as a pure- or co-culture. These co-culture experiments represent a first step in understanding microbial interactions in BES communities with the goal to design complex microbial communities, which specifically convert target substrates into electricity. Further, for the first time, we elucidated S. oneidensis gene expression with an electrode as the only electron acceptor. The expression pattern confirms many previous studies regarding the enzymatic requirements for electrode respiration, and it generates new hypotheses on the functions of proteins, which are so far not known to be involved in electrode respiration.

DESIGN
The BES was either operated with S. oneidensis alone, fed with lactate, or it was operated with S. oneidensis and L. lactis with glucose as primary substrate. The basic medium was a modified M4 medium containing 0.5 g/L yeast extract, 0.5 g/L trypton and 5 g/L glycerol phosphate, besides the commen M4 incredients. S. oneidensis oxidizes lactate to acetate and electrons in a BES - the latter generate a current at a graphite anode. The anode biofilm was harvested after about 4 weeks of continuous BES operation and subjected to total RNA extraction.

PLATFORM
GPL8434 BU_Shewanella_100k_v1.0

CITATIONS
21036604

