TITLE
Custom microchip analysis identifies differentially expressed non-coding RNAs in Epstein-Barr virus-infected B cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Upon Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection of human B lymphocytes non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) regulate expression of viral and cellular genes. In this study, we generated a specialized cDNA library from EBV-immortalized cells and subjected it to deep sequencing. We identified 631 unique ncRNA genes, comprised of 321 potential novel differentially expressed ncRNA candidates. Subsequently, we investigated differential expression of known and potential novel ncRNA candidates by custom-designed microchips by comparing expression of ncRNA genes of EBV-immortalized versus non-infected control cells. Among the differentially expressed candidates from chip analysis, differential expression of six novel ncRNA candidates was verified by northern blot analysis. In addition, microchip analysis resulted in observation of increased expression levels of a significant number of potential ncRNA candidates that were preferentially derived from genomic loci annotated as Alu repetitive elements. Alu elements are members of the repeat subfamily of short interspersed nuclear elements (SINE) and were reported to be transcribed upon stress stimulation. While EBV infection significantly up-regulated expression of Alu-derived RNA transcripts, no significant increase in expression of these transcripts was observed under additional tested stress conditions. By employing deep sequencing followed by custom microchip analysis, we identified six novel differentially expressed ncRNAs as well as significantly increased expression levels of Alu-derived RNA transcripts. These transcripts might be involved in crucial functions upon infection by EBV.

DESIGN
5 biological replica of non-infected BL2 samples were compared to 5 biological replica of LCL 197/2 EBV immortalized samples

PLATFORM
GPL10073 Biocenter Innsbruck EBV SHORT, 6152 v1.0

CITATIONS
21037422

