TITLE
Her2/Neu breast cancer mouse model whole tissue transcriptome

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Purpose:  We generated extensive transcriptional and proteomic profiles from a Her2-driven mouse model of breast cancer that closely recapitulates human breast cancer.  This report makes these data publicly available in raw and processed forms, as a resource to the community.  Importantly, we previously made biospecimens from this same mouse model freely available through a sample repository, so researchers can obtain samples to test biological hypotheses without the need of breeding animals and collecting biospecimens. Experimental design:  Twelve datasets are available, encompassing 841 LC-MS/MS experiments (plasma and tissues) and 255 microarray analyses of multiple tissues (thymus, spleen, liver, blood cells, and breast).  Cases and controls were rigorously paired to avoid bias. Results:  In total, 18,880 unique peptides were identified (PeptideProphet peptide error rate ≤1%), with 3884 and 1659 non-redundant protein groups identified in plasma and tissue datasets, respectively.  Sixty-one of these protein groups overlapped between cancer plasma and cancer tissue. Conclusions and clinical relevance:  These data are of use for advancing our understanding of cancer biology, for software and quality control tool development, investigations of analytical variation in MS/MS data, and selection of proteotypic peptides for MRM-MS.  The availability of these datasets will contribute positively to clinical proteomics.

DESIGN
Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 microarrays were used to profile whole tissues from 5 different tissue types of 25 tumor-bearing and 25 control mice of the Her2/Neu breast cancer mouse model.  The 5 tissues tested were from breast, liver, spleen, blood cell, and thymus.  The tumor-bearing mice were bitransgenic for MMTV-rtTA/TetO-NeuNT, and the control mice were transgenic for TetO-NeuNT only.  The control mice were age- and cage-matched to the tumor-bearing mice.  All samples were lysed and total RNA isolated and amplified prior to hybridization.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21448875

