TITLE
Stromal factors SDF1alpha, sFRP1 and VEGFD induce dopaminergic neuron differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The identified stromal factors SDF1alpha, sFRP1 and VEGFD induce dopaminergic neuron differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells. Human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived dopaminergic (DA) neurons are potentially useful for treating Parkinson’s disease (PD) through cell replacement therapy.  Generation of DA neurons from hESCs has been achieved by co-culture with the stromal cell line PA6, a source of stromal cell-derived inducing activity (SDIA).  However, the factor(s) produced by stromal cells that constitute SDIA is unknown.  We previously reported that medium conditioned by PA6 cells can generate functional DA neurons in the human embryonal carcinoma stem cell line, NTera2.  Here we further examined the effects of PA6-conditioned medium and found that it can induce DA neuronal differentiation in both the NTera2 cell line and the hESC line, I6.  To identify the factor(s) responsible for SDIA, we used large-scale microarray analysis of gene expression combined with proteomic analysis of PA6-conditioned medium.  Four candidate factors (hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), stromal cell-derived factor-1 alpha (SDF1alpha), secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (sFRP1) and vascular endothelial growth factor D (VEGFD)) were identified and immunoaffinity capillary electrophoresis (ICE) was used to establish the protein concentration of these factors in conditioned medium.  Upon addition of SDF1alpha, sFRP1, and VEGFD, we observed an increase in the number of tyrosine hydroxylase- and TuJ1- positive cells in both the NTera2 and I6 cell lines.  These results indicate that SDF1alpha, sFRP1 and VEGF-D are major components of SDIA, and suggest the potential use of these defined factors to elicit dopaminergic differentiation of pluripotent stem cells as a therapeutic intervention in PD.

DESIGN
Mouse embryonic fibroblasts were grown in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% FBS; this conditioned media was used as the control.  PA6, mouse stromal cells, were grown in MEM-alpha supplemented with 10% FBS; this conditioned media is known to induce differentiation in hES cells.

PLATFORM
GPL6103 Illumina mouseRef-8 v1.1 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
22535492

