TITLE
Glucose uptake is required for glucose-stimulated transcriptional response in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
Saccharomyces cerevisiae developed elegant mechanisms to monitor nutrient availability and trigger adaptative responses to nutrient deficiency. Nutrient sensing requires close coordination of cell surface sensors with intracellular mechanisms. This yeast senses the presence of glucose by two modified hexose transporters, Rgt2 and Snf3 (regulating expression of genes encoding hexose transporters) and the G-protein coupled receptor Gpr1 (modulating Protein Kinase A (PKA) activity).. It has been difficult to differentiate between cellular responses mediated by cell surface and intracellular sensors, respectively. Using a strain that is devoid of glucose uptake, we show that the mere presence of glucose does not elicit any glucose-dependent transcriptional responses. This indicates that signals generated by surface sensors are not sufficient to mediate glucose-dependent transcriptional responses. Instead, intracellular glucose or metabolites derived from it are required for transcriptional changes associated with glucose exposure. We used microarrays from biological triplicate samples to measure the global transcriptional response to sudden addition of glucose to yeast cells growing at steady state on ethanol. The experiment was conducted using a strain that is devoid of glucose uptake and compared with an isogenic strain.

DESIGN
The CEN.PK strain was used in this research. A strain with all known hexose transporters deleted (Null strain) was compared with an isogenic reference. The two strains were grown in a chemostat (D = 0.1 h-1) using ethanol as the carbon source. Transcriptional responses between the strains were measured in biological triplicates at steady state and then pulsed with glucose at time t = 0. Transcriptional response was measured again after t = 20 min to determine changes in gene expression chanes only in response to the presence of glucose.

PLATFORM
GPL2529 [Yeast_2] Affymetrix Yeast Genome 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

