TITLE
SNP genotyping of cryptic complexity in structural chromosome abnormalities previously detected by cytogenetic analysis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Purpose: The purpose of this study was to evaluate SNP genotyping methodology as a means to detect chromosomal abnormalities previously diagnosed by G-band karyotype or fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis and to determine the frequency of sub-microscopic (cryptic) chromosomal alterations in these subjects. Methods: We used the Illumina HumanHap Beadchip platform to genotype 40 individuals having previously detected chromosomal anomalies (by G-banded and/or FISH analysis). The resulting data were analyzed for signal intensity (log R ratio) and allelic composition (B allele frequency). Results: SNP array analysis detected 100% of previously identified cytogenetic abnormalities. Changes or clarifications of the ISCN karyotype designation assigned by conventional cytogenetic and/or FISH analysis were made in 82 % of the cases (32 of 39). Nine of the 39 cases (23%) involved a reassignment of an abnormal band while an additional 9 of the 39 (23%) resulted in a clarification of a sub-band assignment. In 8 more of the 39 cases (21%) the previously reported alterations were confirmed, however the SNP analysis also identified related cryptic alterations. SNP analysis not only confirmed FISH-detected abnormalities but also more precisely mapped the breakpoints of 6/6 patients. Investigations into the origin of de novo abnormalities in 15 trio families established that 12 /15 occurred on the paternal chromosome. Conclusions: SNP genotyping array analysis, confirmed all previously detected structural chromosomal abnormalities and provided additional, clinically-relevant genomic information in 82% of these alterations.

DESIGN
To evaluate potential chromosomal abnormalities in patients, we measured SNPs using Illumina 550K and 300K arrays. In some cases we also measured SNPs in parents to determine whether deletions or duplications occurred de novo or were inherited.

PLATFORM
GPL5677 HumanHap300-2 v2.0 Genotyping BeadChip GPL6433 Illumina HumanHap550 Genotyping BeadChip v1

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

