TITLE
Hepatic gene expression profiling reveals key pathways involved in leptin mediated weight loss in ob/ob mice.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The purpose of this study was to identify leptin target genes and subsequent pathways correlated with leptin-mediated weight loss. We utilized the microarray technology to compare two types of leptin administration: one involving a direct stimulatory effect when administered peripherally (subcutaneous: SQ) and another that is indirect, involving a hypothalamic relay that suppresses food intake when leptin is administered centrally (intracerebroventricular: ICV). We report here the impact of central and peripheral administration of leptin on food intake, body weight and body fat composition in ob/ob mice. We also report hepatic gene expression changes caused by central versus peripheral leptin administration. Keywords: comparison

DESIGN
Leptin deficient (ob/ob) mice were continuously administered leptin over 12-days using central (intracerebroventricular) or peripheral (subcutaneous) route of administration. Liver RNA was extracted and hybridized to Illumina microarrays and gene expression data was analyzed. The global gene expression profiles were compared after the central and peripheral leptin treatments in ob/ob mice and C57BL6 mice were used for the baseline gene expression. The groups are as below: Liver_B6: C57BL6 mice Liver_VEH_SQ: ob/ob mice with vehicle subcutaneous treatment Liver_LEP_SQ: ob/ob mice with leptin subcutaneous treatment Liver_VEH_ICV: ob/ob mice with vehicle intracerebroventricular treatment, Liver_LEP_ICV: ob/ob mice with leptin intracerebroventricular treatment, Liver_LEP_ICVN:  represents four animals from LEP_ICV group in which treatment failed or the cannula may not have been in place. While analyzing the phenotype data, we found that there was no weight loss in these four animals. Sectioning of the brain could not confirm placement of the cannula in these animals. The expression of these animals is very similar to the vehicle treated animals.

