TITLE
Elevated AKR1C3 expression promotes prostate cancer cell survival and prostate cell-mediated endothelial cell tube formation: Implications for prostate cancer progression

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background:  Aldo-keto reductase (AKR) 1C family member 3 (AKR1C3), one of four identified human AKR enzymes, catalyzes steroid, prostaglandin, and xenobiotic metabolism.  In the prostate, AKR1C3 is up-regulated in localized and advanced prostate adenocarcinoma, and is associated with prostate cancer (PCa) aggressiveness.  Here we provide initial evidence for potential roles of AKR1C3 in PCa progression.    Methods:  Spatial distribution of AKR1C3 was analyzed using immunohistochemical staining in prostate adenocarcinoma tissue array.  Human PCa PC-3 cells were stably transfected with AKR1C3 cDNA to establish PC3-AKR1C3 transfectants.  Microarray and bioinformatics analyses were performed to identify pathways that are activated by elevated AKR1C3 expression in PCa cells.  Functional confirmation of microarray and bioinformatics results was performed by immunoblot analysis and an in vitro Matrigel angiogenesis assay.   Results:  Elevated AKR1C3 expression was specifically limited to human prostate adenocarcinoma.  Microarray and bioinformatics analysis suggested that elevated AKR1C3 expression in PC-3 cells modulates estradiol and androgen metabolism and activates insulin growth factor (IGF)-1 and Akt signaling pathways.  Immunoblots confirmed that phosphorylated levels of IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) and Akt are significantly up-regulated in PC3-AKR1C3 as compared to mock transfectants.  PC3-AKR1C3 transfectants promoted endothelial cell tube formation in Matrigel as compared to parental PC-3 cells and mock transfectants.    Conclusion:  Microarray and bioinformatics data followed by biological analyses suggest that elevated AKR1C3 expression in PC-3 cells promotes PCa angiogenesis and aggressiveness.  These results suggest AKR1C3 can promote the aggressiveness of PCa through modulating estrogen and androgen metabolism with subsequent activation of growth factor IGF-1 and cytoplasmic Akt signaling pathways.

DESIGN
Total RNA from mock- and ACR1C3 transfected PC-3 cells was isolated, with 2 or 3 biological replicates each. Gene expression data from AKR1C3 transfected PC-3 cells were compared with mock-transfected data.

