TITLE
Effect of HIV infection on co-stimulatory capacity of dendritic cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
HIV uses dendritic cells as a carrier to infect its target CD4+ T cells. At the same time, it also hampers DCs function in terms of their T cell stimulatory capacity and cytokine secretion. We have shown that HIV causes reduction in the expression of co-stimulatory molecules, CD80 and CD86 by DCs at the mRNA level irrespective of the viral subtype or the mode in DC-HIV interaction. The microarray experiments were performed to understand the changes in the transcription factor profile of HIV infected DCs which may in turn lead to reduced CD80/CD86 expression as well as the effect of HIV infection on other co-stimulatory molecules on DCs. The data suggests that TFs NFKB1, NFKB2, REL and MYB may be responsible for the observed decrease in CD80 and CD86 expression and that HIV infection also hampers the expression of other co-stimulatory molecules like CD70, CD30, 4-1BB, OX40L etc.

DESIGN
The total RNA was isolated from LPS matured DCs (positive control) and HIV infected DCs using Qiagen RNeasy Minikit. Agilent Quick-Amp Labelling kit (p/n 5190-0444) was used to synthesize the labeled cDNA from 3 ug of total RNA and further process the hybridized cDNA on the array. All the steps were carried out according to manufacturer’s instructions (www.agilent.com/chem/dnamauals-protocol). The array slides were scanned immediately using high throughput Agilent scanner with SureScan technology. Agilent feature extraction software was used for normalization and statistical analysis,. Pathway and gene ontology analysis was done using Genespring GX v 10.0 and biointerpreter software.  The experiments were performed on DCs cultured from two independent donors. The differential expression was considered if the Log 2 mean of at least -1 for the down regulated genes and +1 for the upregulated genes.  We considered only the genes that were differentially regulated genes in both the donors.

PLATFORM
GPL8607 Genotypic Designed Agilent Insitu Synthesized Homo sapiens 8x15K array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

