TITLE
Myocardial contractile response to physiological stress improves with high saturated fat feeding in heart failure

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Impaired myocardial contractile function is a hallmark of heart failure (HF) which may present under resting conditions and/or during physiological stress.  Previous studies reported that high fat feeding in HF is associated with improved myocardial contractile function at baseline.  Our goal was to determine whether myocardial function is compromised in response to physiological stress and to evaluate the global gene expression profile of rats fed high dietary fat following infarction.   Male Wistar rats underwent ligation or sham surgery and were fed normal (10% kcal fat) (SHAM+NC, HF+NC) or high fat (60% kcal saturated fat) (SHAM+SAT, HF+SAT) for 8 weeks.  Myocardial contractile function was assessed using a Millar pressure-volume (PV) conductance catheter at baseline, during inferior vena caval occlusions and dobutamine (DOB) stress.  Steady state indices of systolic function, left ventricular (LV)+dP/dtmax, stroke work and maximal power were increased in HF+SAT vs HF+NC; HF+NC were reduced vs SHAM+NC.  Preload-recruitable measures of contractility [end systolic PV relationship, maximal elastance, preload recruitable SW and peak+dP/dtmax to end diastolic volume] were decreased in HF+NC but not HF+SAT.  β-adrenergic responsiveness (delta-LV+dP/dtmax and delta-cardiac output DOB 0-10 µg•kg-1•min-1) was reduced in HF, but high fat feeding did not further impact contractile reserve in HF.  Contractile reserve was reduced by high fat in SHAM+SAT.  Microarray gene expression analysis reveals the majority of significantly altered pathways identified to contain multiple gene targets correspond to cell signaling pathways and energy metabolism.  These findings suggest that high saturated fat improves myocardial function at rest and during physiological stress in infarcted hearts, but may negatively impact contractile reserve under non-pathological conditions.  Furthermore, high fat feeding-induced alterations in gene expression related to energy metabolism and specific signaling pathways reveal promising targets through which high saturated fat potentially mediates cardioprotection in heart failure/LV dysfunction.

DESIGN
Comparison of gene expression in heart failure or sham surgery hearts exposed to saturated or normal diets. Male Wistar rats (300-350g) were maintained on a reverse light-dark cycle and all procedures were done 3-6 hours into the dark phase cycle to synchronize with the normal active state of the rodents.  Rats were randomly assigned to receive either a sham-operation (SH) or coronary ligation to induce cardiac dysfunction (HF).  Heart failure was induced by ligating the left main coronary artery.  Following surgery, rats were immediately fed either a normal rodent chow (NC) or a high saturated fat chow (SAT) with 60% caloric content derived from fat (25% palmitic, 33% stearic, 33% oleic acid, Research Diets).

PLATFORM
GPL10239 Illumina Rat Ref-12 v1

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

