TITLE
Ultrastructural and transcriptional profiling of neuropathological misregulation of CREB function

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
We compare here the neurodegenerative processes observed in the hippocampus of bitransgenic mice with chronically altered levels of cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) function. The combination of genome-wide transcriptional profiling of degenerating hippocampal tissue with microscopy analyses reveals that the sustained inhibition of CREB function in A-CREB mice is associated with dark neuron degeneration, whereas its strong chronic activation in VP16-CREB mice primarily causes excitotoxic cell death and inflammation. Furthermore, the meta-analysis with gene expression profiles available in public databases identifies relevant common markers to other neurodegenerative processes and highlights the importance of the immune response in neurodegeneration. Overall, these analyses define the ultrastructural and transcriptional signatures associated with these two forms of hippocampal neurodegeneration, confirm the importance of fine-tuned regulation of CREBdependent gene expression for CA1 neuron survival and function, and provide novel insight into the function of CREB in the etiology of neurodegenerative processes.

DESIGN
For each mouse genome 430 2.0 gene expression array (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA), total RNA was extracted from the hippocampi of three to four mice with the same age, sex, and genotype to produce one pooled sample. We analyzed three late A-CREB pooled samples (6-week-old mice) and three late VP16-CREB pooled samples (3-week-off dox) with their corresponding control littermate samples (three pooled samples for each strain). To compare with early changes, we included two pooled A-CREB early samples (3-week-old mice) and two pooled VP16-CREB early samples (1-week-off dox) with their corresponding control littermate samples. In the case of A-CREB mice, we used the dataset GSE14320. We prepared new samples from bitransgenic mice and control littermates 1 week after transgene induction and hybridized them to mouse genome 430 2.0 genechips. The arrays were hybridized, washed, and screened for quality according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

