TITLE
Lake Whitefish microarray experiment: dwarf vs normal ecotypes

ORGANISM
Coregonus clupeaformis

SUMMARY
Despite the progress achieved in elucidating the ecological mechanisms of adaptive radiation, there has been little focus on documenting the extent of adaptive differentiation in physiological functions during this process. Moreover, a thorough understanding of the genomic basis underlying phenotypic adaptive divergence is still in its infancy. One important evolutionary process for which causal genetic mechanisms are largely unknown pertains to life-history trade-offs. We analysed patterns of gene transcription in liver tissue of sympatric dwarf and normal whitefish from two natural lakes, as well as from populations reared in controlled environments, using a 16 006-gene cDNA microarray in order to: (i) document the extent of physiological adaptive divergence between sympatric dwarf and normal species pairs, and (ii) explore the molecular mechanisms of differential life history trade-offs between growth and survival potentially involved in their adaptive divergence. In the two natural lakes, 6.45% of significantly transcribed genes showed regulation either in parallel fashion (2.39%) or in different directions (4.06%). Among genes showing parallelism in regulation patterns, we observed a higher proportion of over-expressed genes in dwarf relative to normal whitefish (70.6%). Patterns observed in controlled conditions were also generally congruent with those observed in natural populations. Dwarf whitefish consistently showed significant over-expression of genes potentially associated with survival through enhanced activity (energy metabolism, iron homeostasis, lipid metabolism, detoxification), whereas more genes associated with growth (protein synthesis, cell cycle, cell growth) were generally down-regulated in dwarf relative to normal whitefish. Overall, parallelism in patterns of gene transcription, as well as patterns of interindividual variation across controlled and natural environments, provide strong indirect evidence for the role of selection in the evolution of differential regulation of genes involving a vast array of potentially adaptive physiological processes between dwarf and normal whitefish. Our results also provide a first mechanistic, genomic basis for the observed trade-off in life-history traits distinguishing dwarf and normal whitefish species pairs, wherein enhanced survival via more active swimming, necessary for increased foraging and predator avoidance, engages energetic costs that translate into slower growth rate and reduced fecundity in dwarf relative to normal whitefish.

DESIGN
Direct comparison of Dwarf vs Normal ecotypes. Samples comes from two natural environments (two different lakes) and one controled environement.

PLATFORM
GPL2716 GRASP 16K version 2

CITATIONS
18312278

