TITLE
Human whole blood stimulated with Pam2Cys and lipoteichoic acid from Staphylococcus aureus wt and delta-lgt mutant

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Comparison of the immune response of human whole blood to lipoteichoic acid (LTA) derived from the Staphylococcus aureus SA113 delta-lgt mutant (lacks lipoproteins), LTA from S. aureus SA113 wt. and PAM2Cys, a lipoprotein analogue. Background: Our goal was to expand our report that LTA from SA 113 wildtype (wt LTA) and delta-lgt (lgt LTA) induce equal amounts of TNF release by human whole blood (von Aulock et al., J Immunol, 2007). Therefore we traced the translational activation by both LTA in comparison to the synthetic diacylated lipoprotein Pam2Cys-SK4 in human whole blood on an immunology microarray comprising 1076 genes related to apoptosis and signal transduction, cell cycle, chemokines, cytokines and their receptors, extracellular matrix proteins, inflammation and complement system. Results and Discussion: The results show extensive overlaps of the clustered heat-maps of SA113 wt and lgt LTA, which are clearly different from those of Pam2Cys-SK4 stimulation. Only four of the 1076 genes were significantly differently regulated after stimulation with the LTAs, whereas stimulation with Pam2Cys-SK4 led to a significantly different regulation of 43 genes compared to SA 113 wt LTA and 39 compared to SA 113 lgt LTA. Mainly chemokines were upregulated by both LTA, which is consistent with our previous findings (von Aulock et al., Immunobiol, 2003) and different from stimulations with Pam2Cys-SK4. The gene array results support our protein data obtained from LTA-stimulated human whole blood and point to a significant concordance between the immunostimulatory activity of lgt and wt LTA preparations. In contrast, a distinct difference is observed between both LTA and the synthetic lipoprotein Pam2Cys-SK4. This supports the conclusion that the immunostimulatory activity of wt LTA in human whole blood is not determined by possible lipoprotein contaminations.

DESIGN
Human whole blood incubations were done with 4 healthy donor volunteers. 10 µg/ml of wt or lgt LTA or Pam2Cys-SK4 were used to stimulate whole blood diluted 1:5 in RPMI 1640 for 7 h. After the incubation samples were resuspended by gentle shaking, centrifuged at 400 x g for 2 min, and supernatants were removed and stored at -80°C for cytokine measurement. The remaining cell pellet was resuspended and transferred to a 15 ml centrifugation tube (Greiner Bio-One) on ice. 5 ml erythrocyte lysis buffer (EL buffer, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was added to each sample and incubated for 10 min on ice. Samples were briefly vortexed twice during this time. The samples were centrifuged at 400 x g for 10 min at 4°C and the supernatant was discarded. The remaining leukocyte pellet was washed twice with PBS and stored at -80°C until RNA preparation. After RNA preparation, the microarray analysis was done by testing each stimulus against its unstimulated control for each individual blood donor.

PLATFORM
GPL10128 Miltenyi PIQOR (TM) Human Immunology Microarray, antisense

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

