TITLE
Comparative transcriptome analysis of the CO2 sensing pathway via differential expressions of carbonic anhydrase in Cryptococcus neoformans

ORGANISM
Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii H99

SUMMARY
Carbon dioxide (CO2) sensing, transport, and metabolism play a pivotal role in survival and proliferation of pathogenic microbes infecting human host from natural environments due to the drastic difference of CO2 levels. Carbonic anhydrases (CAs) are not only key CO2-metabolic enzymes catalyzing reversible interconversion between CO2 and bicarbonate (HCO3-), but also important CO2-signaling modulators. Cryptococcus neoformans that causes fatal fungal meningitis contains two functional CAs, Can1 and Can2, among which Can2 plays essential roles for growth and sexual differentiation of the pathogen. However, downstream genes and signaling network regulated by CAs have not been studied thus far. In this study, we constructed a C. neoformans strain where CAN2 expression is controlled by the CTR4 (copper transporter) promoter and elucidated its transcriptome patterns by using DNA microarray analysis to elucidate downstream target genes of Can2. Expectedly, the CAN2 promoter replacement strain showed growth defects in a CO2-dependent manner when CAN2 is repressed. The CA-transcriptome analysis discovered a number of Can2-dependent genes, including those involved in fatty acid biosynthesis (FAS1), sexual differentiation (GPB1), capsule structure organization (CAS3), iron-metabolism (CFO2), and a number of stress-regulated genes, including an oxidative stress-responsive Atf1 transcription factor, although a majority of them do not have any orthologs in other fungi. The present study revealed other roles of Atf1 in capsule and melanin production and diverse stress responses, including thermotolerance and antifungal drug resistance, of C. neoformans. This study provides further insights into the signaling network of CA/CO2-sensing pathway in pathogenic fungi.

DESIGN
17 slides are used in this analysis, 3 or 2 biological replicate experiments are performed, total RNAs are extracted from 2 strains (H99 Wild type strain, CTR4::CAN2) at 2 time points (0hr time, 12hr time) in 2 conditions (BCS, CuSO4). We use the mixed all of total RNAs from this experiment as a control RNA. We use Cy5 as Sample dye and Cy3 as a control dye. Several experiment samples are dye swaped.

PLATFORM
GPL8638 Duke Cryptococcus neoformans serotype D (JEC21) 8K

CITATIONS
20516494

