TITLE
Effect of blood sample storage on the study of gene expression in response to ionizing radiation exposure

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
For around ten years, microarrays have been suggested for the diagnosis of ionizing radiation exposure. We assessed for the first time the relevance of gene expression profiling in a real accidental case. This study was performed on peripheral blood mononuclear cells of 41 potential victims. The different strategies of analysis highlighted a huge effect of the blood sample handling on the gene expression profiles. This effect was so high that it could mask specific modulations as a potential effect of ionizing radiation exposure. Thus, we assessed a new way of blood sampling adapted to gene expression analysis: PAXgene. With this method, more than 70% of the modulations of gene expression induced 3 hours after an ex vivo exposure to 0.5 Gy were preserved even in a 24-hour delayed analysis (as for transportation of blood sample from the accident location to the laboratory). We validated a new methodology in order to propose a new strategy of blood sampling and handling for gene profiling. This system could be used in case of accidental overexposure to study whether gene expression is a relevant biomarker of ionizing radiation exposure.

DESIGN
Radiation induced gene expression in human blood was measured at 3 hours after exposure to doses of 0 and 0.5 grays. Following the incubation of 3 hours at 37°C, the RNA extractions were performed either immediately or 24h later (as for transportation of blood sample at room temperature). Two different blood preservation methods were compared: classical anticoagulant and PAXgene Blood RNA System. Venous blood samples of 6 donors were used (3 for anticoagulant study, 3 for Paxgene study). Each sample was hybridized twice.

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

