TITLE
Classical Hodgkin lymphoma shows epigenetic features of an abortive plasma cellular differentiation: acetyl H3 K9/14 ChIP-chip

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background Epigenetic changes are involved in the extinction of the B-cell gene expression program of classical Hodgkin lymphoma. However, little is known regarding epigenetic similarities between classical Hodgkin lymphoma and plasma cell myeloma cells, both of which share an extinction of the gene expression program of mature B-cells. Design and methods Global histone H3 acetylation patterns were determined in cell lines derived from classical Hodgkin lymphoma, plasma cell myeloma and B-cell lymphoma by chromatin immunoprecipitation and subsequent hybridization onto promoter tiling arrays. H3K27 trimethylation was analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation and real-time DNA-PCR for selected genes. Epigenetic modifications were compared to gene expression data. Results B-cell characteristic genes were hypoacetylated in classical Hodgkin lymphoma and plasma cell myeloma cell lines, as demonstrated by comparison of their histone H3 acetylation patterns to those of B-cell lines. However, the number of genes jointly hyperacetylated and expressed in classical Hodgkin lymphoma and plasma cell myeloma cell lines, such as IFR4/MUM1 and RYBP, is limited. Moreover, H3K27 trimethylation for selected B-cell characteristic genes revealed that this additional epigenetic silencing is much more prevalent in classical Hodgkin lymphoma as compared to plasma cell myeloma. Conclusion Our epigenetic data support the view that classical Hodgkin lymphoma is characterized by an abortive plasma cell differentiation with a down-regulation of B-cell characteristic genes but without activation of most plasma cell typical genes.

DESIGN
Three Hodgkin lymphoma cell lines (L1236, KM-H2, L428; referred to as cHL cell lines), three plasma cell myeloma cell lines (L363, U266, LP-1; referred to as PCM cell lines) and three B-cell lymphoma cell lines (SU-DHL4, SU-DHL6 [diffuse large B-cell lymphoma; DLBCL], Namalwa [Burkitt lymphoma; BL]; referred to as B-cell lines) were used for ChIP following the protocol developed by the group of Young (PMID 17406303) with minor modifications. For each ChIP experiment, 10 µg of anti-acetyl-histone H3 (Lys9 + Lys14) antibody was employed.  All experiments were performed in duplicates or triplicates. A detailed protocol is provided as supplementary information in the publication linked to this Series.

PLATFORM
GPL5082 [Hs_PromPR] Affymetrix Human Promoter 1.0R Array

CITATIONS
21393330

