TITLE
Transcript Profiling of Spinal Dorsal Horn in Response to Electroacupuncture on Rats at 1h

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
The electroacupuncture-induced analgesic effect has been used widely to alleviate diverse pains. However, significant individual variations in analgesic effect of EA for both experiments and clinics were reported. According to the sensitivity of the analgesic response to EA stimulation, the subjects could be categorized into high responders (HR) and low responders (LR). However, the molecular mechanism of individual variability in the analgesic response to acupuncture stimulation is still uncertain. This study aims to investigate the potential gene expression in spinal dorsal horn induced by 2Hz/100Hz electroacupuncture in HR and LR rats. Rats were given 2Hz or 100Hz electroacupuncture for 30 min and using cDNA microarrays to compare different gene expression in dorsal horn. Transcriptome profiling analysis found that some co-regulated genes related with electroacupuncture or 2Hz or 100Hz freqencies. These co-regulated genes were plasticity-related by GO analysis. We also found some special regulated genes in HR vs. LR in 2Hz/100Hz electroacupuncture stimulation. These results suggested that neurotransmitter system and cytokine different between HR with LR in 2Hz electroacupuncture. But in 100Hz electroacupunture, there were many different regulated genes related with ribosome between HR with LR, which needs more studies to research the function and may play an important role in HR vs. LR by 100Hz electroacupuncture. Keywords: Transcriptome analysis

DESIGN
Rats were exposed to different frequencies (2Hz or 100Hz) electroacupuncture stimlation for 30 min and nociceptive testing and returned to home cages for 1 hours before sacrificed. According to the sensitivity of the analgesic response to 2Hz or 100Hz EA stimulation, the rats divided into four groups: 2Hz-HR group, 2Hz-LR group, 100Hz-HR group and 100Hz-LR group. Subsequently analyzed their dorsal horn transcript profile using cDNA microarrays, the rats were without receiving electroacupuncture as control. The tissue of dorsal horn (DH) of the fifth and sixth lumbar (L5 and L6) of four or five rats were selected for transcript analysis in each group. The five control rats were mixed and labeled with cy5, each rat of experiment groups was labeled with cy3.

