TITLE
Expression analysis of Sphingomonas paucimobilis sp. EPA505 during biodegradation kinetics of various PAHs and detection of gene in a contaminated soil S3

ORGANISM
Sphingomonas paucimobilis ; uncultured organism

SUMMARY
Studying eight enzymes involved in the degradation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from the model strain Sphingomonas paucimobilis sp. EPA505 using a designed microarray of 8,048 probes. During the biodegradation kinetics with phenanthrene, fluoranthene or a mix of both pollutants, we identified the targeted set of genes induced by these pollutants, compared to basal expression detected with glucose. Hybridizing total DNA extracted from S3, we show the efficiency of our probe design to study a complex environment. Despite the relative small size of our probes (23-mers), their sensitivity is reliable as we can detect the presence of genes in this complex mixture. Obtained results are further described in Sébastien Terrat, Eric Peyretaillade, Olivier Gonçalves, Eric Dugat-Bony, Fabrice Gravelat, and Pierre Peyret. 2010 - Studying the ‘Unkown’ with Metabolic Design, a new probe design software for explorative functional microarrays development. Nucleic Acids Research (submited).

DESIGN
A 17 chip study was realized using total RNA recovered from separate cultures of Sphingomonas paucimobilis sp. EPA505 with phenanthrene, fluoranthene or a mix of these both pollutants as sole carbon and energy source. A negative kinetic expermient was realized with glucose as sole carbon and energy source. Each chip measures the expression level of 8 genes from Sphingomonas paucimobilis sp. EPA505 with 23-mer probes (a total of 8,048 probes) using a new design approach. We also assess metabolic capacities of microbial communities in an aromatic hydrocarbons contaminated soil named S3. Each probe was spotted in triplicate, and a total of 8,863 random probes was used to determine the background noise.

PLATFORM
GPL10343 Nimblegen_Custom_PAH_array_V01

CITATIONS
20860850

