TITLE
Laser Capture Microdissection of Hyperlipidemic Mouse Aorta Atherosclerosis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Atherosclerosis is a transmural chronic inflammatory condition of small and large arteries that is associated with adaptive immune responses at all disease stages. However, impacts of adaptive immune reactions on clinically apparent atherosclerosis such as intima lesion (plaque) rupture, thrombosis, myocardial infarction, and aneurysm largely remain to be identified. It is increasingly recognized that leukocyte infiltrates in plaque, media, and adventitia are distinct but their specific roles have not been defined. To map these infiltrates, we employed laser capture microdissection (LCM) to isolate the three arterial wall laminae using apoE-/- mouse aorta as a model. RNA from LCM-separated tissues was extracted and large scale whole genome expression microarrays were prepared. We observed that the quality of the resulting gene expression maps was compromised by tissue RNA carried over from adjacent laminae during LCM. To account for these flaws, we established quality controls and algorithms to improve the predictive power of LCM-derived microarray data. Our approach creates robust transcriptome atlases of normal and atherosclerotic aorta. Assessing LCM transcriptomes for immunity-related mRNAs indicated markedly distinctive gene expression patterns in the three laminae of the atherosclerotic aorta. These mouse mRNA expression data banks can now be mined to address a wide range of questions in cardiovascular biology.

DESIGN
Wild-type and apoE-deficient mice on the C57BL/6J genetic background were maintained on a standard mouse chow. Total aortae were removed at the age of 78 weeks, abdominal aorta was separated from the remainder of the tissue and arterial wall laminae were separated by laser capture microdissection as described (Beer et al. 2011). Following RNA quality controls, microarrays were prepared following MIAME guidelines as described previously (Uzonyi et al. 2006; Graebner et al. 2009; Lotzer et al. 2010).

PLATFORM
GPL8321 [Mouse430A_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430A 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
16179593 , 16606835 , 19139167 , 20139367 , 21761324

