TITLE
Response of Candida albicans towards a novel antifungal benzimidazole derivative

ORGANISM
Candida albicans

SUMMARY
Fungal infections are a serious health problem in the clinic especially in the immunocompromised patient. Disease ranges from widespread superficial vulvovaginal infections to life-threatening systemic candidiasis. Especially for systemic mycoses only a limited arsenal of antimycotica are available, including azoles, polyenes, echinocandines and amphothericin B. Due to emerging resistance to standard therapy and significant side effects for some antimycotica there is a medical need for new antifungals in the clinic and general practice. In order to expand the arsenal of compounds with antifungal activities we screened compound libraries, including combinatorial libraries as well as more than 30 000 pure compounds derived from organic synthesis for antimycotic activity. In total more than 100 000 compounds were screened using an innovative AS (activity-selectivity) assay analyzing both the antifungal activity and the compatability with human cells at the same time. One promising hit, a Benzimidazol-2-yl-alkylamine derivative, was developed in a series of lead compounds showing potent antifungal activity. ((1S)-1-[1-(3-chlorobenzyl)-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl]-2-methylpropyl-amine) (EMC120B12) showed the highest antifungal activity and best compatability with human cells in several cell culture models and against a number of different yeasts and clinical isolates. Transcriptional profiling indicates that the newly discovered compound is a potential inhibitor of the ergosterol-pathway.

DESIGN
In total, three biological replicates were performed. All experiments were performed as dye swaps. Thus, in total six arrays have been hybridzed. Hybridization experiments included an untreated reference sample and a sample of cells treated with ((1S)-1-[1-(3-chlorobenzyl)-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl]-2-methylpropyl-amine) (EMC120B12). The array included one technical replicate of each probe.

PLATFORM
GPL10374 FhG_IGB_MBT Candida albicans oligo array V1

CITATIONS
21746957 , 21571590

