TITLE
Developmental influence of the cellular prion protein on the gene expression profile in mouse hippocampus

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
A key event in the pathogenic process of prion diseases is the conversion of the cellular prion protein (PrPC) to an abnormal and protease-resistant isoform (PrPSc). Mice lacking PrP are resistant to prion infection, and down-regulation of PrPC during prion infection prevents neuronal loss and the progression to clinical disease. These results are suggestive of the potential beneficial effect of silencing PrPC during prion diseases. However, the silencing of a protein that is widely expressed throughout the CNS could be detrimental to brain homeostasis. The physiological role of PrPC remains still unclear, but several putative functions have been proposed. Among these, several lines of evidence support PrPC function in neuronal development and maintenance. To assess the influence of PrPC on gene expression profile during development in the mouse brain, we undertook a microarray analysis by using RNA isolated from the hippocampus, at two different developmental stages: newborn (4-day-old) and adult (3-month-old) mice, both from Prnp+/+ and Prnp0/0 animals. The comparison of the different datasets allowed us to identify “commonly” co-regulated genes and “uniquely” de-regulated genes during postnatal development in these animal models.  The lack of PrPC during neuronal development affected several biological pathways, among which the most representative were cell signaling, cell-cell communication and transduction process. In addition, the absence of PrPC influenced genes involved in calcium homeostasis, nervous system development, synaptic transmission and cell adhesion. There was only a moderate alteration of the gene expression profile during neuronal development in the animal models we studied. PrPC deficiency does not lead to a dramatic alteration of gene expression profile, and produces moderate altered gene expression levels from young to adult animals. Thus, our results may provide additional support to silencing endogenous PrPC levels as a therapeutic approach to prion diseases.

DESIGN
To analyze the influence of PrPC expression on CNS gene expression profile during development, we investigated WT PrPC (Prnp+/+) and Prnp0/0 mice at two different developmental stages: in neonatal animals (postnatal day 4, P4) and in adult animals (3 months old). For each developmental stage, hippocampi of 3 (pups) or 4 (adult) animals were dissected immediately after animal sacrifice and promptly processed for RNA extraction and purification, for a total of 14 samples.

PLATFORM
GPL8321 [Mouse430A_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430A 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21406608

