TITLE
Novel viruses naturally infecting Caenorhabditis nematodes trigger a small RNA response

ORGANISM
Caenorhabditis elegans

SUMMARY
C. elegans has served as a laboratory model organism due to its ease of manipulation and the availability of both forward and reverse genetics. In recent years, efforts to study host-pathogen interactions in C. elegans have increased. For example, analysis of infections by bacteria such as Pseudomonas, Salmonella or Serratia has revealed the existence of innate immune pathways in C. elegans that are also conserved in vertebrates. To date, there has been no natural virus infection reported in C. elegans or C. briggsae. Here we describe evidence of natural virus infection in wild isolates of both C. elegans and C. briggsae. Two highly divergent but related RNA viruses in the family Nodaviridae, tentatively named Orsay nodavirus and Santeuil nodavirus, were detected and their genomes partially sequenced. Infected worm lysates passed through 0.2 um filters could be used to infect uninfected worms, which could be further passaged for many generations. Furthermore, the viruses were subject to processing by the RNAi machinery as evidenced by the detection of virally derived small RNAs. Infection of mutant worms defective in small RNA pathways yielded more robust levels of viral RNA as compared to infection of isogenic N2 reference worms. These data demonstrate that nodaviruses are natural parasites of nematodes in the wild. Further study of the interactions between these viruses and nematodes is likely to provide insight into the natural ecology of nematodes and may reveal novel innate immune mechanisms that respond to viral infection.

DESIGN
Two small RNA libraries (18-30 nt) from nodavirus-infected and cured C. elegans wild isolate JU1580 were sequenced on the Illumina Genome Analyzer II platform. Samples were treated with tobacco acid pyrophosphatase to allow cloning of small RNA molecules with 5'-triphosphates. Each sample was labelled with a unique four base pair barcode and libraries were multiplexed together with a third library (not included in this submission). The multiplexed libraries were sequenced in triplicate.

PLATFORM
GPL9269 Illumina Genome Analyzer II (Caenorhabditis elegans)

CITATIONS
21283608

