TITLE
Submerged differentiation of Aspergillus niger in carbon-limited cultures approaching zero specific growth rate

ORGANISM
Aspergillus niger

SUMMARY
This work presents an exploration of submerged differentiation of the ubiquitous saprophyte and industrially important fungus, Aspergillus niger, in response to a limited availability of a sole carbon and energy source, maltose. In aspergilli and other mold fungi, asexual reproduction through formation of elaborate conidiogenic structures normally requires an aerial interface. This requirement is bypassed in submerged culture in response to severe nutrient limitation. Continuous cultures with cell retention (retentostat cultures) were applied to generate a fundamental physiological state, where the specific growth rate approaches zero, as the density of the cell population adapts to the supply of the limiting energy source. Temporal differentiation of mycelium structure and commitment to asexual reproduction were major phenomena, apparent on biochemical, morphological, physiological, and transcriptomic level. The severe substrate limitation had a rapid negative impact on cytoplasmic processes, and promoted endo- and exogenous nutrient mobilization, and hyphal compartmentalisation. The first conidiogenic structures appeared after one day with little additional differentiation until Day 4 to 6, where a transition to full commitment to reproductive growth took place. Submerged conidiation in A. niger involved transcriptional regulation of homologs of the regulatory pathway, centered around the Bristle gene (brlA), and structural genes previously described in other aspergilli. Comparison of transcriptomes, revealed a number of co-regulated gene clusters, which appear to encode secondary metabolite biosynthetic potential. We discuss the concept of maintenance energy in the context of differentiation, a possible physiological trigger for sporulation and the special physiological adaptations of the starved mycelium. We also present a simple and efficient method for in situ retention of filamentous organisms.

DESIGN
The dataset consists of 9 Affymetrix arrays derived from defined growth conditions of lab-scale bioreactor cultures (5L). Total RNA was extracted from biomass harvested at three different growth phases: exponential growth phase, 2 and 8 days of retentostat  cultivation. For each of the phases, the data is derived from three biological replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL6758 [dsmM_ANIGERa_anColl] DSM Aspergillus niger CBS513.88 14k v1

CITATIONS
20562270

