TITLE
affy_meloidogyne_rice2-Oryza sativa genes expressed in the early compatible interaction with root-knot nematode

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa

SUMMARY
affy_meloidogyne_rice2 - affy_meloidogyne_rice2 - Plant-parasitic nematodes cause heavy economic losses to global agriculture. The root knot nematode, Meloidogyne incognita, is an obligate parasite that causes significant damage to a broad range of host plants. M. incognita infection to dicotyledous plants is extensively studied but it is also important to study their interaction with monocotyledous plants, in particular with cereals. In our growing conditions, as of day 6, histological studies revealed a profound rice tissue reorganisation around nematodes, notably characterized by the plant feeding site formation. We are investigating the molecular plant response to M. incognita by carrying out a global analysis of gene expression during gall formation in rice, using giant cell-enriched root tissues at this early stage (6dpi) of gall development-Oryza sativa (var. Nipponbare) seedlings were grown on 6 cm3 SAP substrate completed with diluted Hoaglands solution (Reversat et al., 1999). Culture units were placed in a growth chamber illuminated with fluorescent tubes 9/24 h and maintained at 23°C for 6 days before being inoculated with a 300 J2-stage juveniles M. incognita. One day after inoculation (dai), the rice seedlings were immersed in de-ionised water to remove all J2s that had not penetrated the roots and allowing synchronization of the infection. Each seedling was transferred to a hydroponic mini chamber (Reversat et al., 2004). Sampling was performed at 6 dai and each of them contained galls from 45 infected plants, they were then hand-dissected, frozen in liquid-nitrogen and stored at -80°C. As reference samples, uninfected meristematic root fragments were dissected from seedlings grown under the same conditions. Each sample was replicated 3 times. Keywords: normal vs disease comparison

DESIGN
6 arrays - rice

