TITLE
Raloxifene Attenuates Gas6 and Apoptosis in Experimental Aortic Valve Disease in Renal Failure

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Introduction: Renal failure is associated with aortic valve calcification. Using our rat model of uraemia-induced reversible aortic valve calcification, we assessed the role of apoptosis and survival pathways in aortic valve calcification. We also explored the effects of raloxifene - an estrogen receptor modulator on valvular calcification.  Methods: Gene array analysis was performed in aortic valves obtained from 3 groups of rats (n=7 each): calcified valves from rats fed with uremic diet -high-adenine (0.75%), high-phosphate diet (1.5%), valves after calcification resolution following diet cessation (reversibility) and control. In addition, four groups of rats (n=10 each) were used in order to evaluate the effect of raloxifene in aortic valve calcification: three groups as mentioned above and a fourth group fed with the uremic diet which also received daily raloxifene.  Evaluation of these groups included imaging, histology and antigen expression analysis.   Results: Gene array results showed that the majority of the expressed genes that were altered were from the diet group valves. Most apoptosis-related genes were changed in a pro-apoptotic direction in calcified valves. Apoptosis and decrease in several survival pathways were confirmed in calcified valves. Resolution of aortic valve calcification was accompanied by decreased apoptosis and upregulation of these ant-apoptotic pathways. Imaging and histology demonstrated that raloxifene significantly decreased aortic valve calcification.   Conclusion: Downregulation of several survival pathways and apoptosis are involved in the pathogenesis of aortic valve calcification. The beneficial effect of raloxifene in valve calcification is related to apoptosis modulation. This novel observation is important for developing remedies for aortic valve calcification in patients with renal failure.  Introduction: Renal failure is associated with aortic valve calcification. Using our rat model of uraemia-induced reversible aortic valve calcification, we assessed the role of apoptosis and survival pathways in aortic valve calcification. We also explored the effects of raloxifene - an estrogen receptor modulator on valvular calcification.  Methods: Gene array analysis was performed in aortic valves obtained from 3 groups of rats (n=7 each): calcified valves from rats fed with uremic diet -high-adenine (0.75%), high-phosphate diet (1.5%), valves after calcification resolution following diet cessation (reversibility) and control. In addition, four groups of rats (n=10 each) were used in order to evaluate the effect of raloxifene in aortic valve calcification: three groups as mentioned above and a fourth group fed with the uremic diet which also received daily raloxifene.  Evaluation of these groups included imaging, histology and antigen expression analysis.   Results: Gene array results showed that the majority of the expressed genes that were altered were from the diet group valves. Most apoptosis-related genes were changed in a pro-apoptotic direction in calcified valves. Apoptosis and decrease in several survival pathways were confirmed in calcified valves. Resolution of aortic valve calcification was accompanied by decreased apoptosis and upregulation of these ant-apoptotic pathways. Imaging and histology demonstrated that raloxifene significantly decreased aortic valve calcification.   Conclusion: Downregulation of several survival pathways and apoptosis are involved in the pathogenesis of aortic valve calcification. The beneficial effect of raloxifene in valve calcification is related to apoptosis modulation. This novel observation is important for developing remedies for aortic valve calcification in patients with renal failure.

DESIGN
Three-condition experiment,  Uremic-Diet, Reversibility and Control rats. Biological replicates: 7 in each group pooled together.

PLATFORM
GPL16305 Agilent-017643 Rat Microarray (017643_D_20070903)

CITATIONS
21335463

