TITLE
Pol II Ser7phospho ChIP-seq in mES cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
RNA Polymerase II transcribes protein-coding and many non-coding RNA genes in eukaryotes.  The largest subunit of RNA Polymerase II, Rpb1, contains a hepta-peptide repeat on its C-terminal tail with three potential phosphorylation sites (Serine 2, Serine 5 and Serine 7).  Mammalian Rpb1 contains 52 repeats.   The phosphorylation events are catalyzed by specific protein kinases where the phosphorylation of specific residues is coupled to the transcription cycle.  For example, the Cdk7 subunit of TFIIH phosphorylates both Serine 5 and Serine 7 during intiation and the Cdk9 subunit of P-TEFb phosphorylates Serine 2 during the transition into productive elongation.  The dataset presented here is the genome-wide distribution of RNA Pol II with Serine 7 of the CTD phosphorylated in murine embryonic stem cells.  This data, in addition to phospho-specific datasets generated in the same cell type in Rahl et al. Cell 2010 and Seila et al. Science 2008, represents the genome-wide distribution of multiple RNA Pol II isoforms in murine embryonic stem cells: total Pol II, hypophosphorylated CTD Pol II, Serine 2 phosphorylated CTD Pol II, Serine 5 phosphorylated CTD Pol II and Serine 7 phosphorylated CTD Pol II.

DESIGN
An antibody specific to RNA Pol II Serine 7 phosphorylated CTD (gift of Dirk Eick; Chapman et al. Science 2008) was used to enrich for DNA fragments associated with this Pol II isoform in murine embryonic stem cells.  DNA was purified and prepared for Illumina/Solexa sequencing following their standard protocol.  This is a single dataset but together with datasets from Rahl et al. Cell 2010 and Seila et al. Science 2008, these datasets represent the genome-wide distribution of multiple RNA Pol II isoforms in murine embryonic stem cells: total Pol II, hypophosphorylated CTD Pol II, Serine 2 phosphorylated CTD Pol II, Serine 5 phosphorylated CTD Pol II and Serine 7 phosphorylated CTD Pol II.

PLATFORM
GPL9185 Illumina Genome Analyzer (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

