TITLE
Transcriptional profiling of yeast transcription factor deletion strains (rox1, xbp1 or phd1) and wild-type strains in response to hydrogen peroxide or butanol

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
The goal of this study was to determine the effect of transcription factor deletions on the expression of subtelomeric genes in the presence of environmental stimuli. This study is a component of a larger study, which identified that environment-responsive transcription factors bind proto-silencer elements and regulate subtelomeric silencing.  Subtelomeric chromatin is subject to evolutionarily conserved complex epigenetic regulation and is implicated in numerous aspects of cellular function including formation of heterochromatin, regulation of different stress response pathways, and control of lifespan.  Subtelomeric DNA is characterized by the presence of specific repeated segments that serve to propagate silencing activities or to protect chromosomal regions from spreading epigenetic control.  Here, using condition-specific genome wide chromatin immunoprecipitation and expression data, we show that multiple environment-responsive yeast transcription factors act as silencing factors when conditionally associated with subtelomeric proto-silencing regions called X elements.  In this context, some factors control the propagation of silencing toward centromeres in response to stimuli affecting stress responses and metabolism, whereas others influence boundaries of silencing, regulating telomere-proximal genes in Y’ elements.  These data suggest a fundamental mechanism to coordinate telomere biology related to aging and adaptation with cellular environment and the activities of other cellular processes.

DESIGN
Each experiment was performed with two biological and two technical replicates of each condition resulting in a total of four replicates.  Each experiment includes two replicates in each labeling orientation (two replicates of Cy3/Cy5 and two replicates of Cy5/Cy3 (test sample/reference sample)).  There are two replicates per array.

