TITLE
Specified Bacterial Species in Gingival Crevicular Fluid Predict Diversity of  Unattached Subgingival Microbiota

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Analysis of gingival crevicular fluid (GCF) samples may give information of the identity of unattached (planktonic) subgingival bacteria, the 35 forefront candidates for systemic dispersal via ulcerated periodontal pocket  epithelium. Our study represents the first one targeting the identity of bacteria in gingival crevicular fluid. Methodology/Principal findings: We determined bacterial species diversity in GCF samples of a group of periodontitis patients and delineated contributing bacterial and host-associated factors. Subgingival paper point (PP) samples from the same sites were taken for comparison. After DNA extraction, 16S rRNA genes were PCR amplified and DNA-DNA hybridization was performed using a microarray for over 300 bacterial species or groups. Altogether 133 species from 41 genera and 8 phyla 45 were detected with 9 to 62 and 18 to 64 species in GCF and PP samples, respectively, 46 per patient. Projection to latent structures by means of partial least squares (PLS) was applied to the multivariate data analysis. PLS regression analysis showed that species of genera including Campylobacter, Selenomonas, Porphyromonas, Catonella, Tannerella, Dialister, Peptostreptococcus, Streptococcus and Eubacterium had significant positive correlations and the number of teeth with low-grade attachment loss a significant negative correlation to species diversity in GCF samples.  OPLS/O2PLS discriminant analysis revealed significant positive correlations to GCF  sample group membership for species of genera Campylobacter, Leptotrichia, Prevotella, Dialister, Tannerella, Haemophilus, Fusobacterium, Eubacterium, and Actinomyces. Conclusions/Significance: Among a variety of detected species those traditionally classified as Gram-negative anaerobes growing in mature subgingival biofilms were the main predictors for species diversity in GCF samples as well as responsible for distinguishing GCF samples from PP samples. GCF bacteria may provide new prospects for studying dynamic properties of subgingival biofilms.

DESIGN
The microbial profiles of GCF and subgingival plaque were analyzed from 17 subjects with periodontal disease.

PLATFORM
GPL10444 HOMIM-v.02 GPL10445 HOMIM-v.03

CITATIONS
21049043

