TITLE
Peptide alarmone signalling triggers an auto-active bacteriocin necessary for genetic competence

ORGANISM
Streptococcus mutans UA159

SUMMARY
The induction of genetic competence is a strategy used by bacteria to increase their genetic repertoire under stressful environmental conditions. Recently, Streptococcus pneumoniae has been shown to co-ordinate the uptake of transforming DNA with fratricide via increased expression of the peptide pheromone responsible for competence induction. Here, we document that environmental stress-induced expression of the peptide pheromone competence-stimulating peptide (CSP) in the oral pathogen Streptococcus mutans. We showed that CSP is involved in the stress response and determined the CSP-induced regulon in S. mutans by microarray analysis. Contrary to pneumococcus, S. mutans responds to increased concentrations of CSP by cell lysis in only a fraction of the population. We have focused on the mechanism of cell lysis and have identified a novel bacteriocin as the ‘death effector’. Most importantly, we showed that this bacteriocin causes cell death via a novel mechanism of action: intracellular action against self. We have also identified the cognate bacteriocin immunity protein, which resides in a separate unlinked genetic locus to allow its differential regulation. The role of the lytic response in S. mutans competence is also discussed. Together, these findings reveal a novel autolytic pathway in S. mutans which may be involved in the dissemination of fitness-enhancing genes in the oral biofilm.

DESIGN
Streptococcus mutans UA159 were grown with 2 uM CSP or without (uninduced control) to mid-log phase. Total RNA was extracted as described above. The cDNAs were prepared for hybridization using the PFGRC protocol. Microarray chips were scanned using a Gene Pix 4000B (Axon) and analyzed using the TM4 Microarray Software Suite ( http://www.tm4.org/ ). Transcript levels were measured by cDNA hybridized to a fourfold redundant S. mutans microarray and averaged for three replicated hybridizations. Differential gene expression was based on a post-normalization cut-off of ± > twofold.

PLATFORM
GPL5911 JCVI PFGRC Streptococcus mutans 10K v2.1 array designed primarily based on strain UA159

CITATIONS
19400789

