TITLE
Gene expression patterns in Schistosoma mansoni larvae and eggs

ORGANISM
Schistosoma mansoni ; Biomphalaria glabrata

SUMMARY
Protein variation in blood-dwelling schistosome worms generated by differential splicing of micro-exon gene transcripts. The infective schistosome cercaria develops from an undifferentiated germ ball within the daughter sporocyst in the molluscan host, during which considerable morphological development and synthesis of proteins essential for infection occurs. The free-living, non-feeding cercaria is notable for its swimming and host location behaviour. On contact with host skin it rapidly penetrates, replaces its tegument surface membranes, and begins body remodelling, before crossing the dermis to exit the skin via a blood vessel. Such a ‘violent’ transition from snail to fresh water to mammalian host should be accompanied by remarkable changes in the patterns of gene expression.  All gene models from version E of the S. mansoni genome (www.GeneDB.org) were incorporated into a 350K feature Roche-NimbleGen, high-density oligonucleotide array. From a map-ordered list, every 13th 50mer was chosen as a probe. Double-stranded cDNA from three biological replicates each of germ balls, cercariae, and day 3 schistosomula was hybridised to the array without amplification. Statistical analysis was carried out using programmes from the Bioconductor suite (Gentleman et al. 2004 Genome Biol 5(10):R80). More than 1000 loci were shown to be differentially expressed in each of the comparisons between the three life cycle stages. Gene ontology (GO) analysis was then carried out to discover the categories enriched in each stage. In addition custom categories based on biological function (e.g. stress response) or parasite tissue (e.g. tegument) were analysed.

DESIGN
Three biological replicates each of germ balls, cercariae, day 3 in vitro cultured schistosomula, and eggs were used. No technical replicates were included. This is the first genome-wide microarray platform for S. mansoni. It was used to investigate the gene expression patterns of the above lifecycle stages. The first three are the stages before, during and after penetration of mammalian host skin.

PLATFORM
GPL10466 NimbleGen Schistosoma mansoni 385K v1

CITATIONS
20606017

