TITLE
Induction of Ovarian Primordial Follicle Assembly by Connective Tissue Growth Factor CTGF

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Primordial follicle assembly is a process that occurs in the embryonic or early post natal ovary in which oocyte nests break down to form individual primordial follicles.  The size of this initial pool of primordial follicles in part determines the reproductive lifespan of the female.  Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) was identified as a potential regulatory candidate for this process in a previous microarray analysis of follicle development.  The current study examines the effects of CTGF and associated transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGFbeta-1) on follicle assembly.  Ovaries were removed from newborn rat pups and placed in an organ culture system for two days to measure the effect of these factors on follicle assembly.  In addition, ovaries were cultured and treated for ten days to determine the potential of CTGF and TGFbeta-1 to manipulate the primordial follicle pool size over a longer developmental time period.  The ovaries treated with CTGF for two days were found to have an increased proportion of assembled follicles.  TGFbeta-1 had no effect on primordial follicle assembly and in combination with CTGF decreased oocyte number in the ovary after two days of culture.  Over ten days of treatment only the combined treatment of CTGF and TGFbeta-1 was found to cause an increase in the proportion of assembled follicles.  Interestingly, treatment with TGFbeta-1 alone resulted in fewer total oocytes in the ovary and decreased the primordial follicle pool size after ten days of culture.  Observations indicate that CTGF alone or in combination with TGFbeta-1 stimulates primordial follicle assembly and TGFbeta-1 can decrease the primordial follicle pool size.  CTGF was found to regulate the ovarian transcriptome during primordial follicle assembly and an integrative network of genes was identified.  CTGF is one of the first growth factors shown to promote primordial follicle assembly, while TGFbeta-1 is one of the first factors shown to decrease the primordial follicle pool size.  These observations suggest the possibility of manipulating primordial follicle pool size and influencing female reproductive lifespan. We used microarrays to determine genes expressed differentially between control and CTGF (connective tissue growth factor) treated P0 ovary

DESIGN
RNA samples from 3 control groups are compared to 3 CTGF treated ovary groups

PLATFORM
GPL6247 [RaGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Rat Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
20886044

