TITLE
The role of basal immunoglobulin signaling in immature B cell development

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
This series represent several subgroups of experiments designed to investigate the role of basal immunoglobulin signaling in immature B cell development.  The first subgroup of arrays (Ctrl Mhi, Cre Mhi, Cre Mlo) was done to identify the changes in gene expression in immature B cells as a consequence of inducible deletion of surface IgM expression via Cre-LoxP mediated excision of Ig heavy chain.  The second subgroup of arrays (GFPneg, GFPpos, FxE Ctrl, FxE HA) was done to identify the changes in gene expression in immature B cells as a consequence of blockade of tyrosine kinase signaling with herbimycin A treatment.  The third subgroup of arrays (FxD, FxE, B6 Mneg, HEL Mhi) was done to establish gene expression profiles of immature B, pre B and pro B cells as reference platforms for the other two subgroups.  (Tze etal. Public Library of Science Biology, 2005) The appended supplementary tables are described as follows: TABLE 1: Transformed array signal intensities used for statistical analysis. Listed are all probe sets excluding masked probe sets and Affymetrix hybridization control probe sets. Results are based on the following definitions: - Values with detection p values < 0.1 were considered present. - Signal intensities with detection = " A " or with values < 20 were set to " 20 " . TABLE 2: Genes differentially expressed between Ctrl Mhi and Cre Mlo cell populations and associated signal values. Results are based on the following definitions: - 2-fold or greater difference in means - difference in mean expression values > 200 - P < 0.01 (by Student's T test) TABLE 3: Probesets used for clustering in Figures 2 and 3 of publication TABLE 4: Probesets used for clustering in Figure 7 of publication TABLE 5: Correlation coefficients between all cell populations. Correlation coefficients were calculated as an additional method to demonstrate the relationship of the various cell populations to each other. Shown are the correlation coefficients generated using the mean expression values for each of the 101 transcripts from Figure 7 of publication. Keywords = bone marrow B cells

