TITLE
Gene expression data from melanoma cell lines and melanocyte controls

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The two most common melanoma histopathologic subtypes, superficial spreading (SSM) and nodular melanoma (NM), are believed to represent sequential phases of linear progression from radial to vertical growth. Studies suggest, however, that SSM and NM are biologically distinct. We utilized an integrative genomic approach to examine the possibility that SSM and NM are the result of independent pathways characterized by unique molecular alterations. Cell lines including SSM, NM, metastatic melanoma, and melanocyte controls were evaluated for copy number changes and differential mRNA expression using single nucleotide polymorphism array (SNP 6.0, Affymetrix) and gene array (U133A 2.0, Affymetrix). Data sets were integrated to identify copy number alterations that correlated with gene expression, and array results were validated using immunohistochemistry on human tissue microarrays (TMAs) and an external data set.  The functional effect of genomic deletion was assessed by lentiviral overexpression. Integrative genomics revealed 8 genes in which NM/SSM-specific copy number alterations were correlated with NM/SSM differential gene expression (P < 0.05, Spearman’s rank). Pathways analysis of differentially expressed genes (N=114) showed enrichment for metabolic-related processes. SSM-specific genomic deletions (DIS3, MTAP, G3BP2, SEC23IP, USO1) were verified in an expanded panel of cell lines, and forced overexpression of MTAP in SSM resulted in reduced cell growth. Metabolism-related gene ALDH7A1 was verified as overexpressed in NM using human TMAs.The identification of recurrent genomic deletions in SSM not present in NM challenges the linear model of melanoma progression and supports the unique molecular classification of SSM and NM.

DESIGN
Gene expression profiling using Affymetrix U133A 2.0 arrays was performed on 18 melanoma cell lines including 2 primary superficial spreading melanoma, 2 primary nodular melanoma, 2 metastatic nodular melanoma, and 12 metastatic cell lines. Four melanocyte control lines were also evaluated including 2 immortalized melanocyte cell lines (Hermes 1 and 2B) and 2 normal melanocyte lines cultured from neonatal foreskin (HEM-N and HEM-LP).

PLATFORM
GPL571 [HG-U133A_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21343389

