TITLE
The study of Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) spleen global gene expression response to intraperitoneal injection with formalin-killed atypical Aeromonas salmonicida.

ORGANISM
Gadus morhua

SUMMARY
This study was performed to validate the newly developed CGP Atlantic cod 20K oligonucleotide microarray. Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) received an intraperitoneal injection of either formalin-killed, atypical Aeromonas salmonicida (Asal) or PBS and transcriptional profiles of spleen tissues from Asal-injected fish were compared to those from pre-injection control fish and PBS-injected control fish. Gene expression profiles resulting from this study were compared to those from suppression subtractive hybridization library studies, that were previously performed on the same samples, and to literature. Gene expression patterns of single genes were confirmed by QPCR analysis. This study has shown that the newly developed CGP Atlantic cod 20K oligo microarray platform is a valuable tool for cod genomic research.

DESIGN
Fish were assigned to 1 of 3 groups: Asal group, PBS group or 'undisturbed control' group (the latter were not handled during the experiment). These groups were kept in 3 separate tanks. For the test samples, RNA was used from individual spleen samples that were taken from 6 fish from each of 4 treatment groups: PBS group pre-injection (0H PBS), Asal group pre-injection (0H Asal), PBS group 24 hours post-injection (24HPI PBS) and Asal group 24 hours post-injection (24HPI Asal). All test samples were labeled with AlexaFluor 647. For the universal reference sample, RNA from 31 'undisturbed control' fish was pooled, with each individual contributing an equal amount, and labeled with AlexaFluor 555. Each individual test sample was hybridized together with the universal reference sample on an array. For one sample from the 0H PBS group the array failed. This study therefore includes 6 biological replicates for 0H Asal, 24HPI Asal and 24HPI PBS groups and 5 biological replicates for the 0H PBS group.

PLATFORM
GPL10532 CGP Atlantic cod 20K oligo array v1.0

CITATIONS
21127932

