TITLE
Altered immune phenotype in peripheral blood cells of patients with scleroderma-associated pulmonary hypertension

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Rationale:  Pulmonary arterial hypertension is a common and potentially fatal complication of scleroderma that may involve inflammatory and autoimmune mechanisms.  Alterations in the gene expression of peripheral blood mononuclear cells have been previously described in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension.  The ability to identify patients at risk for developing pulmonary hypertension would be clinically beneficial. Objective:  To identify genes that are differentially expressed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in scleroderma patients with and without pulmonary hypertension which could be used as biomarkers of disease for early diagnosis and provide insight into pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension in at-risk populations. Methods and Results:  Gene expression analysis was performed on a carefully characterized Microarray Cohort of scleroderma patients with (n=10) and without (n=10) pulmonary hypertension.  Differentially expressed genes were confirmed in the Microarray Cohort and validated in a separate Validation Cohort of scleroderma patients with (n=15) and without (n=19) pulmonary hypertension by RT-qPCR.  We identified inflammatory and immune-related genes including interleukin-7 receptor (IL-7R) and chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7) as differentially expressed in patients with scleroderma-associated pulmonary hypertension.  Flow cytometry confirmed decreased expression of IL-7R on circulating CD4+ T cells from scleroderma patients with pulmonary hypertension. Conclusions:  Differences exist in the expression of inflammatory and immune-related genes  in peripheral blood cells derived from patients with scleroderma-related pulmonary hypertension compared to those with normal pulmonary artery pressures.  These findings may have implications as biomarkers to screen at-risk populations to facilitate early diagnosis and provide insight into inflammatory and autoimmune mechanisms of scleroderma-related pulmonary hypertension.

DESIGN
Gene expression analysis was performed on a carefully characterized Microarray Cohort of scleroderma patients with (n=10) and without (n=10) pulmonary hypertension.  Differentially expressed genes were confirmed in the Microarray Cohort by RT-qPCR.

