TITLE
Drosophila expression data from larval, prepupal and pupal wings to identify targets of Hox protein Ultrabithorax (Ubx)

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Hox genes regionalize the animal body axis by modifying complex morphogenetic and differentiation processes during development. The transformation of wings into halteres by the Hox gene Ultrabithorax (Ubx) in Drosophila melanogaster presents an excellent model system to study the transcriptional networks that control such complex developmental programmes. We have employed an inducible misexpression system to switch on Ubx in the wing epithelium at successive larval, prepupal and pupal stages, and have used microarray expression profiling to identify the primary transcriptional responses to Ubx. We find that Ubx regulates hundreds of downstream genes, mostly in a subtle manner. These targets are largely distinct at the different stages of appendage development and diversification.

DESIGN
We have generated an experimental fly line combining the nabGal4NP3537-driver, a tub-GAL80ts transgene, and a UAS-UbxIa transgene (the control line was carrying a UAS-eGFP transgene instead). Our core microarray analysis has involved comparison of the transcriptional profile of experimental wings carrying the UAS-UbxIa transgene with that of control wings carrying the UAS-eGFP transgene. Pairwise comparisons have been carried out at three successive developmental stages, in particular at (i) the third instar larval wandering stage, about 4hrs before puparium formation at 29˚C, (ii) the prepupal stage, 6hrs after puparium formation (APF) at 29˚C, and (iii) the early pupal stage, 16hrs APF at 29˚C. Moreover, pairwise comparisons have been carried out with samples developed exclusively at 19˚C (UbxIa or eGFP expression OFF), as well as with samples collected at 16hrs after the temperature shift from 19 to 29˚C (UbxIa or eGFP expression ON). This has allowed us to distinguish the Ubx-dependent effects from the intrinsic expression differences between the fly lines used, and from the temperature-induced responses. We have carried out 4 biological replicates for each condition making a total of 48 hybridizations to Affymetrix Drosophila Genome 2.0 arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL1322 [Drosophila_2] Affymetrix Drosophila Genome 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21282633

