TITLE
Rainbow trout erythrocytes stimulated with LPS and Poly(I:C)

ORGANISM
Oncorhynchus mykiss

SUMMARY
The focus of this study was to investigate the response of cultured rainbow trout erythrocytes to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and to the analog viral dsRNA Poly(I:C) using a salmonid-specific microarray platform enriched with immune-related genes. Although the transcriptomic response measured as the total number of differentially expressed genes was higher in LPS, the intensity response, in terms of genes with a FC > 2, was greater in Poly(I:C) treated cells. These two treatments shared the regulation of some genes, but not alls followed the same pattern. Over representation of Gene Ontology functional categories showed us that Poly(I:C) treatment produced a immune response whereas LPS stimulation affect biological processes specially.

DESIGN
Trout erythrocytes were isolated from blood by twice Ficoll 1.007 density gradient centrifugations. For primary cell culture, erythrocytes were resuspended in DMEM (PAA Laboratories) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS, PAA Laboratories) and the antibiotic Primocin (100 μg/ml, Invivogen) at a density of 7.5x106 cells/ml in six well cell culture plates (NUNC) and cultured at 18 ºC and 5% CO2. Erythrocytes were stimulated with LPS from E. coli (serotype 026:B6, Sigma) and Poly(I:C) (Invivogen) at 50 μg/ml, each treatment had their own control plate. All culture plates were incubated for 24h. Total RNA was extracted from the cultures using 1 ml of Tri Reagent (Sigma) following the manufacturer’s instructions with minor modifications. Quantity and integrity was analyzed by Experion RNA StdSens Analysis Kit (Bio-Rad). The design of the microarray posses 1818 genes printed in six replicates each, including random clones from common and subtracted cDNA libraries which were compared with known vertebrate proteins using blastx. The platform was enriched in immune-related genes.

PLATFORM
GPL6154 UKU_trout_1.8K_v1

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

