TITLE
Fibrosis with Inflammation at One Year Predicts Transplant Functional Decline

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
We previously observed reduced graft survival for kidney transplants having interstitial fibrosis with subclinical inflammation, but not fibrosis alone, on 1-year protocol biopsy. The current study aimed to determine whether fibrosis with inflammation at 1 year is associated with renal functional decline in a low-risk transplant cohort and to characterize the nature of the inflammation. Subjects were living-donor, tacrolimus/mycophenolate-treated transplant recipients without overt risk factors for reduced graft survival (n=151). Transplants with normal histology (n=86) or fibrosis alone (n=45) on 1-year protocol biopsy had stable renal function between 1 and 5 years, while those having fibrosis with inflammation (n=20) had declining glomerular filtration rate and reduced graft survival. Immunohistochemistry confirmed increased interstitial T-cells and macrophages/dendritic cells in the fibrosis with inflammation group. Gene expression was performed on a subset of biopsies in each group and demonstrated increased expression of transcripts related to innate and cognate immunity in transplants having fibrosis with inflammation. Pathway- and pathological process-specific analyses of microarray profiles revealed that, in fibrosis with inflammation, over-expressed transcripts were enriched for potentially damaging immunological activities including Toll-like receptor signaling, antigen presentation/dendritic cell maturation, interferon gamma-inducible response, cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated and acute rejection-associated genes. Thus, fibrosis with inflammation in 1-year protocol biopsies is associated with reduced graft survival and function and with a rejection-like gene expression signature even in recipients with no clinical risk for inferior outcome. Early interventions aimed at altering rejection-like inflammation may favor improved long-term KTx survival.

DESIGN
We analyzed gene expression from a group of 65 renal transplant recipients. Patient groups were carefully selected to include patients on the same immunosuppression (Prograf-MMF-Pred), transplant type (LD), absence of over post-transplant complications (AR, BK, DGF).  For each patient a 1 year protocol biopsy was examined by conventional histology and gene expression.  By histology the patients were categorized as histologically normal (n=25, i/cg/ci=0), IF/TA (n=24, i/cg=0, ci > 0) and IFTA+i (n=16, cg=0, i/ci > 0).

