TITLE
Impact of NRSF variant over-expression in SK-N-AS human neuroblastoma cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Neuron-restrictive silencer factor (NRSF) and its isoforms are differentially regulated in  rodent models of self-sustaining status epilepticus (SSSE). NRSF isoforms regulate genes  associated with SSSE, including the proconvulsant tachykinins, brain-derived neurotrophic  factor and multiple ion channels. NRSF isoforms may direct distinct gene expression  patterns during SSSE and the ratio of each isoform may be a causative factor in traumatic  damage to the CNS. Here we analysed global gene expression changes by microarray in  human SK-N-AS neuroblastoma cells following the over expression of NRSF and a truncated  isoform, HZ4. We used bioinformatics software to analyse the microarray dataset and  correlated these data with epilepsy candidate gene pathways. Findings were validated by  RT-PCR. We demonstrated that NRSF and HZ4 direct overlapping as well as distinct gene  expression patterns and that they differentially modulated gene expression patterns  associated with epilepsy. Finally we revealed that NRSF gene expression may be modulated  by the anticonvulsant, phenytoin. This study provides fundamental information on networks  of genes that may be altered during SSSE, following altered NRSF expression, which may be  important in future therapeutic research and clinical analysis of genetic variation  predisposing to epilepsy.

DESIGN
Human SK-N-AS cells were treated with expression constructs over-expressing either the full length human transcription factor, NRSF, (via the RE-EX1 construct) or a truncated variant (via the HZ4 construct). Cells were treated for either 0hrs (base line controls), 24hrs or 48hrs, before being immediately processed for RNA extraction. An affymetrix microarray was employed to investigate gene expression patterns, comparing each time point (24hrs or 48hrs) againsts its baseline ()hrs) control. This experiment was performed in triplicate samples per batch, and over three batches.

