TITLE
Signaling from the secretory granule to the nucleus: Uhmk1 and PAM

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Neurons and endocrine cells package peptides in secretory granules (large dense core vesicles; LDCVs) for storage and stimulated release.  Studies of PAM, an essential secretory granule membrane enzyme, revealed a pathway that can relay information from secretory granules to the nucleus, resulting in alterations in gene expression.  The cytosolic domain of PAM, a type 1 membrane enzyme essential for the production of amidated peptides, is basally phosphorylated by Uhmk1 and other Ser/Thr kinases.  Proopiomelanocortin processing in AtT-20 corticotrope tumor cells was increased when Uhmk1 expression was reduced.  Uhmk1 was concentrated in the nucleus, but cycled rapidly between nucleus and cytosol.  Endoproteolytic cleavage of PAM releases a soluble cytosolic domain (CD) fragment that localizes to the nucleus.  Localization of PAM-CD to the nucleus was decreased when PAM-CD with phosphomimetic mutations was examined and when active Uhmk1 was simultaneously over-expressed.  Membrane-tethering Uhmk1 did not eliminate its ability to exclude PAM-CD from the nucleus, suggesting that cytosolic Uhmk1 could cause this response.  Microarray analysis demonstrated the ability of PAM to increase expression of a small subset of genes, including aquaporin 1 (Aqp1) in AtT-20 cells.  Aqp1 mRNA levels were higher in wildtype mice than in mice heterozygous for PAM, indicating that a similar relationship occurs in vivo.  Expression of PAM-CD also increased Aqp1 levels while expression of Uhmk1 diminished Aqp1 expression. The outlines of a pathway that ties secretory granule metabolism to the transcriptome are thus apparent.

DESIGN
Three separate clones of AtT-20 mouse corticotrope tumor cells stably transfected with doxycycline-inducible rat PAM-1 (clones 14, 6_1, 6_2) were treated with cotrol or doxycycline medium for 48 hours.  Total mRNA was isolated and hybridized to an Illumina MouseWG-6 v 2.0 whole genome BeadChip.

