TITLE
DEFINING A RAT BLOOD PRESSURE QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS TO A < 81.8KB CONGENIC SEGMENT: COMPREHENSIVE SEQUENCING AND RENAL TRANSCRIPTOME ANALYSIS.

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Evidence from multiple linkage and genome-wide association studies suggest that human chromosome 2 (HSA2) contains alleles that influence blood pressure (BP). Homologous to a large segment of HSA2 is rat chromosome 9 (RNO9), to which a BP quantitative trait locus (QTL) was previously mapped. The objective of the current study was to further resolve this BP QTL. Eleven congenic strains with introgressed segments spanning < 81.8kb to < 1.33Mb were developed by introgressing genomic segments of RNO9 from the Dahl salt-resistant (R) rat onto the genome of the Dahl salt-sensitive (S) rat and tested for BP.  The congenic strain with the shortest introgressed segment spanning < 81.8kb significantly lowered BP of the hypertensive S rat by 25 mm Hg and significantly increased its mean survival by 45 days. In contrast, two other congenic strains had increased BP compared with the S. We focused on the < 81.8kb congenic strain which represents the shortest genomic segment to which a BP QTL has been definitively mapped to date in any species.  Sequencing of this entire region in both S and R rats detected 563 variants. The region did not contain any known or predicted rat protein coding genes. Further, a whole genome renal transcriptome analysis between S and the < 81.8kb S.R congenic strain revealed alterations in several critical genes implicated in renal homeostasis. Taken together, our results provide the basis for future studies to examine the relationship between the candidate variants within the QTL region and the renal differentially expressed genes as potential causal mechanisms for BP regulation.

DESIGN
Six male S control and 6 male congenic S.R(9)x3x2Bx1x8  rats born on the same day were selected, weaned at 30 days of age, and caged with 1 congenic and 1 S rat per cage. They were raised on a High-salt (2%) diet (Harlan Teklad diet TD 7034; Harlan–Sprague-Dawley) and sacrificed at 53 days of age and total RNAs were isolated from the kidney. The isolated RNA from two animals were pooled together and considered as one biological sample. Three such RNA samples from S and congenic rats were used for the cRNA preparation. cRNA was prepared and fragmented as suggested by Affymetrix technical manual, and simultaneously hybridized (15 µg adjusted cRNA for each chip) to Rat Expression Array 230 2.0 (3' IVT Expression Analysis). Statistical analyses of the microarray data were performed using R statistical package (version 2.8.1).

PLATFORM
GPL1355 [Rat230_2] Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
20716646

