TITLE
Expression data from pulmonary metastases and primary tumors of clear-cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) with different disease-free survivals

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The understanding of metastatic spread is limited and molecular mechanisms causing particular characteristics of metastasis are largely unknown. This comprises the extremely varying dormancy periods of tumor cells in the secondary organ after metastatic spread, represented by the disease-free survival (DFS) of the patients, or differing numbers of metastases in different patients. Knowing the molecular fundamentals of these phenomena would support the individual prediction of patients´ outcome and facilitate the decision for an appropriate monitoring and therapy regime. In a first study (PMID 19391132) we analyzed the transcriptome-wide expression profiles of 20 pulmonary metastases of renal cell carcinoma (Met1-9, Met11-18, Met20, Met23, Met25) to identify expression patterns associated with the dormancy period and the number of metastases per patient. Pre-processed and analyzed data for this study are available in GEO Series GSE14378. In this second study, we validated the DFS-associated expression pattern from the first study on four further metastases and also included primary ccRCC with different DFS. For this, the microarray data of all metastases and primary tumors were pre-processed together. The aim of this second study was to identify those genes, which are differentially expressed in metastases developed after different dormancy periods and which are already deregulated in primary tumors. Genes differentially expressed in synchronously vs. metachronously metastases might contribute functionally to the dormancy period. Genes already deregulated in primary ccRCC might be suitable for prognostic purposes.

DESIGN
metastases manifested synchronously or metachronously (DFS less than or equal to 9 months compared with DFS greater than or equal to 60 months); primary ccRCC which developed synchronous or metachronous metastases (DFS less than or equal to 6 months compared with DFS greater than or equal to 45 months)

