TITLE
Time course of the transcriptional response of three porcine intestinal sections to Salmonella typhimurium infection

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
The GeneChip Porcine Genome Array was used to identify the transcriptional response upon Salmonella typhimurium infection in three porcine intestinal sections (jejumun, ileum and colon) along a time course of 1,2 and 6 days post infection. The objetives in this study were i) characterize transcriptional changes upon S. typhimurium infection in the intestinal mucosa; ii) identify differences among porcine intestinal sections in inmune resposes against S. typhimurium; iii) identify change that could be associated to salmonellosis pathogenesis and symtomatology; and finally, iv) identify transcriptional changes that could be induced by S. typhimurium in order to get bacterial survival and successful colonization.

DESIGN
Sixteen male and female crossbreeds weaned piglets, approximately 4 weeks of age, were used in this study. Before infection, faecal samples from each animal were analyzed to confirm that piglets were free of Salmonella. Pigs were housed in an environmentally controlled isolation facility at 25ºC and under constant light with ad libitum access to feed and water. After an acclimation period of 5 days, pigs were challenged orally with 108 cfu of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium phagetype DT104 (n=12), whereas the control group (n=4) received sterile medium orally. The four non-infected control pigs were necropsied two hours prior to experimental infection. Four randomly chosen infected pigs were necropsied at 1 day post infection (dpi), 2 dpi and 6 dpi, respectively. Faecal swabs, blood and tissues samples were aseptically collected. Ileum was collected, sectioned in pieces of around 10 cm and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for mucosa isolation and RNA purification. To ensure the inoculated pigs were infected, faecal samples were cultured and checked for positive Salmonellae organism Four reps per treatment and tissue group except 'Ileum 1dpi' has only 3 replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL3533 [Porcine] Affymetrix Porcine Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

