TITLE
Integration of transcript expression, copy number and LOH analysis of infiltrating ductal carcinoma of the breast: copy number analysis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Introduction: A major challenge in the interpretation of genomic profiling data generated from breast cancer samples is the identification of driver genes as distinct from bystander genes which do not impact tumorigenesis. One way to assess the relative importance of alterations in the transcriptome profile is to combine complementary analyses that assess changes in the copy number alterations (CNAs). This integrated  analysis  permits the identification of genes with altered expression that map within specific chromosomal regions that demonstrate copy number alterations, providing a mechanistic approach to  identify the 'driver genes’. Methods:  We have performed whole genome analysis of CNAs using the Affymetrix 250K Mapping array on 22 infiltrating ductal carcinoma samples (IDCs). Analysis of transcript expression alterations was performed using the Affymetrix U133 Plus2.0 array on 16 IDC samples. Twelve IDC samples were analyzed using both platforms and the data integrated. We also incorporated data from LOH analysis to identify genes showing loss of expression in LOH regions. Results:  Copy number analysis results demarcated smaller boundaries for many previously reported CNAs, and in some cases, the CNAs were defined as more than a single contiguous event. Additionally, we were able to assign driver genes to these commonly reported regions using a rigorous methodology. For example, RAB25 showed a large increased expression in the tumors and mapped to the commonly reported amplification at 1q22. We also identified 5 genes in the 8q24 amplicon and TSEN4 in the 17q25 amplified region. LOH analysis confirmed some previously reported regions, and integration with copy number data determined that the detected LOH were copy neutral events. Finally, we have identified several RXR pathways that demonstrated down-regulation in IDC whose members may represent further targets of therapeutic intervention. Conclusion: We have demonstrated the utility of the application of integrated analysis using high-resolution CGH and whole genome transcript analysis for detecting driver genes in IDC. The high resolution platform allowed a refined demarcation of CNAs, and gene expression profiling provided a mechanism to detect genes directly impacted by the CNA. This is the first report of LOH in IDC using a high resolution platform.

DESIGN
22 IDC samples were analyzed for CNA and an overlapping 16 samples were analyzed for gene expression

