TITLE
Identification of follicular marker genes as pregnancy predictors for human IVF

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Multiple pregnancy represents an important health risk to both mother and child in fertility treatment. To reduce a high twin rate, restriction to one embryo transfer is needed. Morphological evaluation methods for predicting embryo viability has significant limitations. Tight communication exists between the follicular cells (FCs) and the oocyte; therefore, developmental competence may be determined by markers expressed in the surrounding FCs. In this study, cells were recovered on a per-follicle basis by individual follicle puncture. Hybridization analysis using a custom-made complementary DNA microarray containing FC transcripts was performed. Genes expressed in FCs associated with good morphological transferred embryos were identified from follicles associated with a pregnancy outcome (pregnancy group) or no pregnancy (non-pregnancy group). Ten candidates from the Pregnancy group and three from the Non-pregnancy group were validated by qRT-PCR. The best predictors associated with pregnancy were UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase-2 (UGP2) and pleckstrin homology-like domain, family A, member 1 (PHLDA1). Genes assessment showed no significant candidate genes associated with non-pregnancy outcome, but GA-binding protein transcription factor β1 (GABPB1) showed a tendency to be potentially more expressed in the non-pregnancy group. These markers could be related to granulosa luteinisation process and could be used to improve embryo selection for successful single embryo transfer.

DESIGN
Two pools were made for the hybridizations. 7 patients who produced follicular cells from oocytes that resulted in a 100% pregnancy success rate (positive samples; n=9 follicles) were chosen for the competant pool and 7 patients who produced follicular cells from oocytes that resulted in a transferred embryo with unsuccessful pregnancy (negative samples; n=9 follicles) were chosen for the incompetant pool. The hybridization were done in dye-swap.

PLATFORM
GPL10668 Laval/Sirard_human-bovine_granulosa_2.5K_V1.0

CITATIONS
20610614

