TITLE
The nucleoid-associated protein HU controls three regulons that coordinate virulence and general physiology in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium

ORGANISM
Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium

SUMMARY
The regulon of genes controlled by the HU nucleoid-associated proteins was examined in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium). DNA microarrays were used to detect the effect on the bacterial transcriptome of knockout mutations in the hupA, the hupB and in both the hupA and hupB genes. Distinct but overlapping patterns of gene expression were detected in the transcriptome at each time point for each of the three mutants, pointing to the existence of not one but three regulons of genes controlled by the HU proteins. Mutations in the hup genes altered the expression of regulatory and structural genes in both the SPI1 and the SPI2 pathogenicity islands. The hupA hupB double mutant was found to be defective in invasion of CACO2 and CHO epithelial cell lines and in its ability to survive in J774A.1 macrophage-like cells. The double mutant also had defective swarming activity and had a competitive fitness disadvantage compared to the wild type. In contrast, inactivation of just the hupB gene resulted in increased fitness and correlated with the up-regulation of members of the RpoS regulon in exponential phase cultures. Elimination of both the hupA and hupB genes resulted in strong down-regulation of the genes coding for the integration host factor, IHF, at all three time points.

DESIGN
The effect of hupA and hupB single-deletions and hupA and hupB double-deletion on S. Typhimurium gene expression during growth in LB was analysed at 3 different time points (1, 4 and 6 hours post-inoculation). Between two and three biological replicates, as well as technical replicates, were performed for each mutant and time point. For this study, we used Salmonella genomic DNA as the comparator which also acted as the control for spot quality.

PLATFORM
GPL9091 IFR_Salmonella_5.3k_v1.1

CITATIONS
21212121

