TITLE
RNA-Binding Protein targets in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
The vast landscape of RNA-protein interactions at the heart of post-transcriptional regulation remains largely unexplored. Indeed it is likely that, even in yeast, a substantial fraction of the regulatory RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) remain to be discovered. Systematic experimental methods can play a key role in discovering these RBPs - most of the known yeast RBPs lack RNA-binding domains that might enable this activity to be predicted. We describe here a new proteome-wide approach to identify RNA-protein interactions based on in vitro binding of RNA samples to yeast protein microarrays that represent over 80% of the yeast proteome. We used this procedure to screen for novel RBPs and RNA-protein interactions. A complementary mass spectrometry technique also identified proteins that associate with yeast mRNAs. Both the protein microarray and mass spectrometry methods successfully identify previously annotated RBPs, suggesting that other proteins identified in these assays might be novel RBPs. Of 35 putative novel RBPs identified by either or both of these methods, 12, including 75% of the eight most highly-ranked candidates, reproducibly associated with specific cellular RNAs. Surprisingly, most of the 12 newly discovered RBPs were enzymes. Functional characteristics of the RNA targets of some of the novel RBPs suggest coordinated post-transcriptional regulation of subunits of protein complexes and a possible link between mRNA trafficking and vesicle transport. Our results suggest that many more RBPs still remain to be identified and provide a set of candidates for further investigation.

DESIGN
Set of arrays organized by shared biological context, such as organism, tumors types, processes, etc.

PLATFORM
GPL10695 SMD Print_1478 yeast protoarray YA104704 GPL10696 SMD Print_1531 yeast protoarray YPROT2 GPL10697 SMD Print_1587 Saccharomyces cerevisiae CPBZO8 GPL10698 SMD Print_1703 Saccharomyces cerevisiae cpce

CITATIONS
20844764

