TITLE
Expression data from wild-type and PPARalpha-null mice exposed to perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) is a perfluoroalkyl acid (PFAA) and a persistent environmental contaminant found in the tissues of humans and wildlife.  Although blood levels of PFOS have begun to decline, health concerns remain because of the long half-life of PFOS in humans. Like other PFAAs, such as perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), PFOS is an activator of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPARα) and exhibits hepatocarcinogenic potential in rodents.  PFOS is also a developmental toxicant in rodents where, unlike PFOA, it’s mode of action is independent of PPARα.  Wild-type (WT) and PPARα-null (Null) mice were dosed with 0, 3, or 10 mg/kg/day PFOS for 7 days.  Animals were euthanized, livers weighed, and liver samples collected for histology and preparation of total RNA.  Gene profiling was conducted using Affymetrix 430_2 microarrays.  In WT mice, PFOS induced changes that were characteristic of PPARα transactivation including regulation of genes associated with lipid metabolism, peroxisome biogenesis, proteasome activation, and inflammation.  PPARα-independent changes were indicated in both WT and Null mice by altered expression of genes related to lipid metabolism, inflammation, and xenobiotic metabolism.  Such results are similar to prior studies done with PFOA and are consistent with modest activation of the constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) and possibly PPARγ and/or PPARβ/δ.  Unique treatment-related effects were also found in Null mice including altered expression of genes associated with ribosome biogenesis, oxidative phosphorylation and cholesterol biosynthesis. Of interest was up-regulation of Cyp7a1, a gene which is under the control of various transcription regulators.  Hence, in addition to its ability to modestly activate PPARα, PFOS induces a variety of “off-target” effects as well.

DESIGN
PPARalpha-null and wild-type male mice at 6-9 months of age were dosed by gavage for 7 consecutive days with either 0, 3, or 10 mg/kg PFOS (potassium salt) in 0.5% Tween 20.   Five biological replicates consisting of individual animals were included in each dosage group.  Data were compared to results previously published by our group for PFOA and Wy-14,643, a commonly used agonist of PPARalpha (Rosen et al., Toxicol Pathol. 36:592-607, 2008; GSE9796)

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
20936131

