TITLE
microRNA profiling in Mouse Eye: Retina, Lens, Cornea, Retinal Pigment Epithelium

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
MicroRNA expression in the mouse eye.MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are key regulators of biological processes. To define miRNA function in the eye, it is essential to determine a high-resolution profile of their spatial and temporal distribution.  In this report, we present the first comprehensive survey of miRNA expression in ocular tissues, using both microarray and RNA in situ hybridization (ISH) procedures. We initially determined the expression profiles of miRNAs in the retina, lens, cornea and retinal pigment epithelium of the adult mouse eye by microarray. Each tissue exhibited notably distinct miRNA enrichment patterns and cluster analysis identified groups of miRNAs that showed predominant expression in specific ocular tissues or combinations of them. Next, we performed RNA ISH for over 220 miRNAs, including those showing the highest expression levels by microarray, and generated a high-resolution expression atlas of miRNAs in the developing and adult wild-type mouse eye, which is accessible in the form of a publicly available web database. We found that 122 miRNAs displayed restricted expression domains in the eye at different developmental stages, with the majority of them expressed in one or more cell layers of the neural retina .  This analysis revealed miRNAs with differential expression in ocular tissues and provided a detailed atlas of their tissue-specific distribution during development of the murine eye. The combination of the two approaches offers a valuable resource to decipher the contributions of specific miRNAs and miRNA clusters to the development of distinct ocular structures.

DESIGN
microRNA profiling of ocular tissues from mouse. In particular we analysed the cornea, lens, Retina Pigment Epithelium (RPE) and retina and compared them against RNA extracted from the entire eye. The purpose of this experiment was to understand which microRNAs are present nd/or show differential expression in the various structures of the eye (cornea, lens, RPE, retina). The samples numbered 1 & 2 (i.e. CORNEA1, CORNEA2 etc ) are biological replicates, prepared from tissues dissecyed from different groups of wild-type animals. RNA extracted from the entire eye (EYE) served as the unique reference sample. For each tissue to be analysed we performed the following hybridizations:  - 2 slides for lens (LENS1, LENS2) vs entire eye (EYE)  - 2 slides for RPE (RPE1, RPE2) vs entire eye (EYE)  - 2 slides for retina (RETINA1, RETINA2) vs entire eye (EYE)  - 2 slides for cornea (CORNEA1, CORNEA2) vs entire eye (EYE)  - 1 slide for entire eye (EYE) vs entire eye (EYE)

PLATFORM
GPL7723 miRCURY LNA microRNA Array, v.11.0 - hsa, mmu & rno

CITATIONS
21171988

