TITLE
Genome-wide analysis of H3K9me2 in ibm1, kyp, and cmt3 mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
In diverse eukaryotes, constitutively silent sequences, such as transposons and repeats, are marked by methylation at histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9me). Despites the conservation and importance in the genome integrity, mechanisms to exclude H3K9m from active genes remained largely unexplored. Here we show in Arabidopsis that the exclusion depends on a histone demethylase gene, IBM1 (increase in BONSAI methylation); loss-of-function ibm1 mutation caused ectopic H3K9me in thousands of genes, which accompanies genic DNA methylation at non-CG sites. The ibm1-induced genic H3K9me depended on both histone methylase KYP/SUVH4 and DNA methylase CMT3, suggesting interdependence of two epigenetic marks – H3K9me and non-CG methylation. Notably, IBM1 enhanced loss of H3K9m in transcriptionally de-repressed sequences. Furthermore, disruption of transcription in genes induced ectopic non-CG methylation, mimicking the loss of IBM1 function. We propose that active chromatin is stabilized by the autocatalytic loop of transcription and H3K9 demethylation. This process counteracts accumulation of silent epigenetic marks, H3K9me and non-CG methylation, which is also autocatalytic.

DESIGN
Leaves of 4-week-old plants were fixed as described previously (Saze et al, 2008). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was performed as described previously (Kimura et al, 2008), using antibody against H3K9me2 (CMA307, Kimura et al, 2008, PMID: 18227620). Non-immunoprecipitated DNA (input DNA) and ChIP samples were amplified, labeled, and hybridized to microarray according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Protocols for Chromatin Immunoprecipitation and Amplification, NimbleGen). Input DNA and ChIP DNA were differentially labeled with Cy3 and Cy5, respectively, and competitively hybridized to a microarray chip. We used NimbleGen 2.1M HD2 array covering entire genome of A. thaliana.

