TITLE
Transciptomic analysis of the hal4hal5 mutant of Saccharomyces cerevisiae

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
The yeast protein kinases Sat4/Hal4 and Hal5 are required for the plasma membrane stability of the K+ transporter Trk1 and some amino acid and glucose permeases. The transcriptomic analysis presented here indicates alterations in the general control of both nitrogen and carbon metabolism. Accordingly, we observed reduced uptake of methionine and leucine in the hal4 hal5 mutant. This decrease correlates with activation of the Gcn2-Gcn4 pathway, as measured by expression of the lacZ gene under the control of the Gcn4 promoter. However, with the exception of methionine biosynthetic genes, few amino acid biosynthetic genes are induced in the hal4 hal5 mutant, whereas several genes involved in amino acid catabolism are repressed. Concerning glucose metabolism, we found that this mutant exhibits derepression of respiratory genes in the presence of glucose, leading to an increased activity of mitochondrial enzymes, as measured by SDH activity. In addition, the reduced glucose consumption in the hal4 hal5 mutant correlates with a more acidic intracellular pH and with low activity of the plasma membrane H+-ATPase. As a compensatory mechanism for the low glycolytic rate, the hal4 hal5 mutant overexpresses the HXT4 high affinity glucose transporter and the hexokinase genes. These results indicate that the hal4 hal5 mutant presents defects in the general control of nitrogen and carbon metabolism, which correlate with reduced transport of amino acids and glucose, respectively. A more acidic intracellular pH may contribute to some defects of this mutant.

DESIGN
Four biological replicates were used to assess diferentially expression between wild type yeast strain and the hal4hal5 mutant strain for three sample sets: 1) cells grown in YPD pH 4.5 and BY4741 genetic background, 2) cells grown in YPD pH 4.5 and W303 genetic background, 3) cells grown in YPD pH 6.0 and W303 genetic background. Differentially expressed genes were identified using one-class significant analysis of microarrays (SAM; Tusher et al, 2004)

PLATFORM
GPL4069 Yeast_ALL DNA chip

CITATIONS
20952580

