TITLE
miRNA profile in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are an endogenous conserved class of non-coding 20–22 nt small RNAs that regulate gene expression at post-transcriptional level by mostly binding to 3′-UTR of target mRNAs, leading to mRNA degradation or translation inhibition. Recent reports demonstrate a role for miRNA expression in the disease progression and outcome. By now, many researcher focusing on miRNA expression profiles in Barrett's esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma have been reported. Nevertheless, there is still a little information available about specific miRNA expression pattern and their roles in ESCC. To develop novel diagnostic and therapeutic targets for esophageal squamous cancer, we first investigated the expression profile of miRNA in three pairs of ESCC clinical samples.

DESIGN
Tissues of ESCC and the matched normal counterparts were obtained from surgical specimens immediately after resection from patients undergoing primary surgical treatment of esophageal carcinoma from the Department of Tumor Surgery of Shantou Central Hospital, China. RNA labeling and hybridization were completed by KangChen Bio-tech Inc. (Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, total RNA from three pairs of esophageal carcinoma and matched normal tissues were isolated by Trizol (Invitrogen, USA) and purified by RNeasy mini kit (QIAGEN, German). The concentration and quality of total RNA were measured by NanoDrop ND-1000 at 260 and 280 nm (A260/280) and checked by gel electrophoresis. Each RNA sample from three pairs of ESCC was separately labeled either using the miRCURY Hy3/Hy5 labeling kit and hybridized on the six miRCURYTM locked nucleic acid (LNA) array version 11.0 (Exiqon, Denmark), which contains probes for 1700 mature miRNA. Scans were quantified by using GenePix software (Molecular Devices). The data were exported to Microsoft Excel worksheets, log2 transformed, normalized using global Lowess (Locally Weighted Scatter plot Smoothing) regression algorithm (MIDAS, TIGR Microarray Data Analysis System).

PLATFORM
GPL7723 miRCURY LNA microRNA Array, v.11.0 - hsa, mmu & rno

CITATIONS
21218087

