TITLE
Transcriptome profile of peripheral blood mononuclear cells in children with acute otitis media caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Streptococcus pneumoniae (Spn) is the predominant causative organism of acute otitis media (AOM) in children. A human cDNA microarray comprising 30,968 human genome probes was used to evaluate the transcriptional changes that occur in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) at the onset of clinical AOM caused by Spn infection in children after comparison of microarray results with the pre-infection healthy stage of the same children.

DESIGN
Four to ten milliliters of heparinized peripheral venous blood was collected from children at 6 to 30 months of age when they were in acute otitis media (AOM) stage and pre-infection healthy stage. The diagnosis of AOM was based on symptoms and signs as well as S. pneumoniae culture positive in the middle ear fluid. Patients with polymicrobial infections, history of immunodeficiency, history of chronic or recurrent AOM, chronic disease, or receiving steroids or other immunomodulatory agents were excluded. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated by the Ficoll gradient and total RNA was extracted from PBMCs using the QIAamp RNA blood Mini Kit (Qiagen, Maryland, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Double-stranded cDNA generated from total RNA was labeled with Cyanine-5 and subsequently hybridized to Human OneArray glass slides according to the manufacturer's standard protocols (PhalanxBio Inc, CA, USA). Microarrays were scanned at 5 μm resolution using an Agilent scanner. Raw intensity signals for each microarray were captured using a Molecular Dynamics Axon 4100A scanner, measured using GenePixPro™ Software. The data from all microarrays in each experimental set was then analyzed using Omicsoft Array Studio software; control and missing features were removed, and the remaining signals were quantile normalized.

PLATFORM
GPL6254 Phalanx Human OneArray

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

