TITLE
Cell type-specific induction of mRNA in human B cells and monocytes by IFN-beta

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Compared to primary human monocytes in whole blood cultures, few B cells activated STAT1 in response to stimulation of 2000 IU/ml IFN-beta for 45 minutes.  Because activation of STAT1 leads to apoptosis induction, we tested the hypothesis that less pro-apoptotic genes are induced in B cells as compared to monocytes. Manuscript titled: Major differences in the responses of primary human leukocyte subsets to IFN-beta. Abstract: Treatment of cell lines with type I IFNs activates the formation of ISGF3 (STAT1/STAT2/ IRF9), which induces the expression of many genes.  To study this response in primary cells, we treated fresh human blood with IFN-beta and used flow cytometry to analyze phosphorylated STATs1, 3 and 5 in CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, B cells, and monocytes.  The activation of STAT1 was remarkably different among these leukocyte subsets.  In contrast to monocytes, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, few B cells activated STAT1 in response to IFN-beta, a finding that could not be explained by decreased levels of IFNAR2 or STAT1 or enhanced levels of SOCS1 or relevant protein tyrosine phosphatases in B cells.  Micro-array and real-time PCR analyses revealed the induction of STAT1-dependent pro-apoptotic mRNAs in monocytes but not in B cells.  These data show that ISGF3 or STAT1 homodimers are not the main activators of gene expression in primary B cells of healthy humans.  Notably, in B cells and especially in CD4+ T cells, IFN-beta activated STAT5 in addition to STAT3, with biological effects often opposite from those driven by activated STAT1.  These data help to explain why IFN-beta increases the survival of primary human B cells and CD4+ T cells, but enhances the apoptosis of monocytes, and also to understand how leukocyte subsets are differentially affected by endogenous type I IFNs during viral or bacterial infections, and by type I IFN treatment of patients with multiple sclerosis, hepatitis or cancer.

DESIGN
Undiluted whole blood of 2 healthy individuals (HI) was used, and either stimulated with IFN-beta or left untreated (control) for 3 hrs. After 3 hrs, both B cells and monocytes were isolated from whole blood of the first healthy individual, and only B cells were isolated from whole blood of the second healthy individual.

PLATFORM
GPL6104 Illumina humanRef-8 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
20956346

