TITLE
Global transcriptomic profiling of hypoxic ischemia in an in vivo neonatal mouse model: Striatum

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Hypoxia-ischemia (HI) brain damage is one of the most common causes of neonatal brain injuries, amidst other conditions such as intrauterine infection and perinatal cerebral hemorrhage (Bracci et al., 2006). HI, occurring during the perinatal period, severely affects brain integrity resulting in detrimental long-term neurological morbidity in terms of motor, intellectual, educational and neuropsychological performance deficits (e.g. cerebral palsy, mental retardation, learning disability and epilepsy), and even neonatal mortality  (Cowan et al., 2003; Ferriero, 2004; van Handel et al., 2007; Shalak and Perlman, 2004). Current therapeutic interventions fail to provide substantial reversal of HI brain injuries and improvement in overall cognitive function. Recent clinical studies demonstrated that post-HI hypothermia provide moderate neuroprotection but fail to show any significant reduction in neonatal morbidity and mortality (Shankaran et al., 2005). We would like to investigate the transcriptional effects of HI on neonatal brain, and if hypoxic pre-conditioning is beneficial to the reduction of brain damage.

DESIGN
Microarray analysis was performed on the striatum of neonatal brains using Illumina mouse Ref8 V2 genechips. The right common carotid artery was exposed through a ventral midline neck incision and permanently occluded by electrocoagulation, The wound was sutured and mouse pups were returned to their mother for 1.5–2 h. Sham control and pre-conditioned mice (n = 4) underwent the identical procedure, without carotid artery occlusion.  Pups were then placed in an 8% O2/92% N2 humidified chamber at 37°C for 1 h with tissue extraction taking place 3h, 8h and 24h thereafter (n=4 respectively). Sham controls were included in this study too (n=4 respectively).

PLATFORM
GPL6885 Illumina MouseRef-8 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

