TITLE
Intellectual disability and mood disorder associated with partial deletion of the Neurexin 1 Gene

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Abstract Background Neurexins are proteins located in the presynaptic membrane that bind postsynaptic ligands, neuroligins, neurexophilins, and dystrophoglycan. They exert profound effects on neurological function by mediating signalling across synapses and determining synaptic characteristics through the recruitment of additional proteins for synapse formation. Alterations in neurexin-encoding genes cause cognitive disorders such as autism, developmental delay and schizophrenia. The three neurexin genes in the human genome (NRXN1, NRXN2, and NRXN3) each have two different functional promoters, producing a large (alpha) and small (beta) transcript with corresponding proteins. NRXN1 produces hundreds, perhaps thousands, of different transcripts with differential localization in the CNS. Results We report here the identification of an individual (53825) with mild dysmorphia, severe language disorder, mild intellectual disability, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and a mood disorder. Genomic analysis by Affymetrix 6.0 Gene Chip and FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization) using probes specific for NRXN1 revealed a hemizygous deletion of approximately 190 Kb, which includes exons 3-5 of NRXN1. This deletion should result in the absence of the vast majority of different NRXN1 alpha transcripts from one of the NRXN1 gene copies, without effecting NRXN1 beta transcription.

DESIGN
Copy number analysis of Affymetrix 6.0 SNP arrays was performed according to the manufacturer's directions on DNA extracted from cryopreserved diagnostic bone marrow or peripheral blood samples for pediatric patients. One sample showed partial deletion of NRXN1 alpha; data presented in this Series.

PLATFORM
GPL6801 [GenomeWideSNP_6] Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP 6.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

