TITLE
Control of shoot branching by Light quality in Arabidopsis plants (wt and brc1-2)

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Plant architecture greatly depends on its branching patterns. Branches are formed from meristems initiated in the axils of leaves. Axillary meristems may develop immediately giving new shoots or they may become arrested after a short period of growth as dormant axillary buds. This decision is affected by endogenous and environmental factors. We are studying two Arabidopsis genes coding for TCP transcription factors, BRANCHED1 (BRC1) and BRANCHED2 (BRC2) that control this key decision. Several endogenous and environmental stimuli affect this process one of them is the quality of ambient light. Plants have developed sophisticated mechanisms that allow them to detect the presence of nearby plants and trigger responses of development to avoid the shade. This set of responses is known as shade avoidance. One response to this syndrome, with high agronomic relevance, is the suppression of branching. The genetic basis of this response is still largely unknown. Our goal is to carry out, in Arabidopsis, a systematic study of the genetic control of the removal of branching during the escape response of the shadow. We found that Arabidopsis plants produce fewer branches when grown at high density. We also found that the removal of high-density branch is accompanied by up-regulation of BRC1. On the other hand, short light treatment enriched in far-red (which simulate the shade plant) also cause an accumulation of BRC1 mRNA levels in plants grown at low density. Besides initial data off transcriptomic analysis (wt vs. brc1-2) indicate that BRC1 could be involved in signaling / response to light in the axillary buds. In this study we have identified several potential target genes of BRC1 involved in the response to light. One is PIL2 (PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR 3-LIKE 2), a gene that encodes a bHLH transcription factor that interacts with APRR1/TOC1. We are currently characterizing in more detail at the genetic and molecular level the BRC1 relationship with this and other potential target genes and their role in the control of branching patterns.

DESIGN
The microarray analysis was performed using RNA samples obtained from three independent plant pools grown under identical conditions. The cDNA synthesized from RNA of wild type or brc1-2 plants grown either in white light  (WT-WL, brc1-2-WL) or red+far red light (WT-FR, brc1-2-FR) was hybridized.

PLATFORM
GPL3513 Galbraith Laboratory Operon Long Oligonucleotide Microarray version 3.0 (ATv304.02.Z)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

