TITLE
TBCRC 001:  Randomized Phase II Study of Cetuximab in Combination with Carboplatin in Stage IV Triple Negative Breast Cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Abstract Background. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a targetable molecule in basal-like breast cancer, which comprises most “triple negative” breast cancer (TNBC), the only breast cancer subtype without established targeted therapy. Methods. In this randomized phase II trial, metastatic TNBC patients received the anti-EGFR antibody cetuximab (250mg/kg/week iv) with carboplatin (AUC2/wk iv) added on progression, or concomitant cetuximab + carboplatin. Molecular subtyping was done on archival specimens and those with accessible tumors provided fresh tissue, before and after 7-14 days of therapy, for microarray analyses to explore EGFR pathway inhibition. Results. Of 102 TNBC patients 74% were of the basal-like molecular subtype.  Response rate to cetuximab was 6% (2/31), and was 16% (4/25) to cetuximab + carboplatin after progression. Upfront cetuximab + carboplatin produced responses in 17% (12/71); 31% responded or had prolonged disease stabilization. Time to progression was 2.1 months (95% CI 1.8-5.5) and overall survival 10.4 months (95% CI 7.7-13.1) for those treated with the combination regimen. Among 16 patients with evaluable serial biopsies, genomic patterns of the EGFR pathway showed activated status in 13 and inhibition by therapy in 5. Conclusions.  While most TNBC were basal-like, a significant proportion were different subtypes. The aggressive nature of metastatic TNBC leads to limited survival. Despite a promising preclinical rationale and evidence of EGFR pathway activation in most, targeted treatment with cetuximab as a single agent had marginal activity and cetuximab added to carboplatin demonstrated modest activity.  Serial biopsies as part of metastatic breast cancer studies are feasible, and this study confirmed that the EGFR pathway was inhibited by therapy in only a minority suggesting ligand-independent activation in most tumors. Tissue acquisition and drug selection based upon individualized pathway activation status should be an important part of future studies of TNBC.

