TITLE
Linkage of behavioral and genomic impacts of a wastewater effluent on the fathead minnow

ORGANISM
Pimephales promelas

SUMMARY
Rivers containing effluents from water treatment plants are complex soups of compounds, ranging from pharmaceuticals to natural hormones.  Male fathead minnows (Pimephales promelas) were exposed for 3 weeks to effluent waters from the Metropolitan Wastewater Treatment Plant in St. Paul, MN. Fish were tested for their competitive nest holding behavior.   Changes in vitellogenin were measured and these were correlated to changes in gene expression using a 22,000 gene microarray developed specifically for fathead minnows.  Significant changes in gene expression were observed in both liver and gonad, which correlate to phenotypic changes of vitellogenin induction and reduced competitive behavior. We also compared by real-time PCR the expression changes in key genes related to steroid biosynthesis and metabolism in fish exposed to the effluent as well as in fish exposed to a model estrogen and a model androgen.  While the gene expression signature from effluent-exposed fish shared some elements with estrogen and androgen signatures, overall it was different, underscoring the complexity of compounds present in sewage and their different modes of action.

DESIGN
Fathead minnow 22,000 gene arrays were designed by EcoArray (Alachua, FL) and were purchased from Agilent.  Array hybridizations were performed using a reference design, where each sample was compared to a reference sample.  The reference consisted of equal amounts of RNA from control female and male tissues (liver, brain and gonad) and was prepared as a standard for several experiments.  Four replicates consisting of four different individuals were analyzed for each of the tissues, liver and gonad for both the control and the effluent-exposed fish.  cDNA synthesis, cRNA labeling, amplification and hybridization were performed following the manufacturer’s kits and protocols (Agilent Low RNA Input Fluorescent Linear Amplification Kit and Agilent 60-mer oligo microarray processing protocol; Agilent, Palo Alto, CA).  Ovarian and liver samples from the fish were labeled with Cy5 while the reference sample was labeled with Cy3.

PLATFORM
GPL7282 EcoArray Fathead minnow 44K v1.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

