TITLE
Effect of surface waters from Eglin Air Force Base on gene expression in fathead minnow (Pimephales promelas)

ORGANISM
Pimephales promelas

SUMMARY
The federally endangered Okaloosa darter (Etheostoma okaloosae) is found almost exclusively on the Eglin Air Force Base in the Choctawhatchee Bay watershed of Florida. Portions of this limited habitat are threatened with erosion of soils, altered hydrology, and impaired water quality. One stream reach in particular, East Turkey Creek, has demonstrated potential water quality problems including poor invertebrate bioassessment scores (IBI), uncharacteristically high conductivity values, and low numbers of Okaloosa darters. General water quality (dissolved oxygen, specific conductance, pH, temperature, and relative turbidity and primary productivity) was characterized in both the potentially impacted East Turkey Creek and a reference stream (Long Creek). Water quality was assessed during a 30 day exposure using passive samplers for both non-polar and polar effluent parameters. Metal loading in the system was assessed via fish tissue burdens in resident Pteronotropis hypseleotris. Additionally, microarray analysis was performed on gonad and liver tissue from fathead minnows, Pimephales promelas, after 48-h exposures to water collected from the two creeks and brought into the laboratory. Gene expression changes were evident at the site below the influence of a wastewater spray field sited along East Turkey Creek, suggesting that anthropogenic compounds in the effluent waters may have affected both liver and testis function and could be related to account the general decrease in populations of the Okaloosa darter.

DESIGN
Array hybridizations were performed using a single color design. Four biological replicates consisting of four different individuals were analyzed for each of the treatments (University of Florida control, and each of five sites). Site C was left out of subsequent analysis for publication, due to poor characterization of the site.  Two Samples were left out of the normalization/analysis due to QC failure.  Therefore, there are only 3 replicates of the " testis, site A water, exposed 48 h. " and " liver, site E water, exposed 48 h. " groups.

PLATFORM
GPL9248 Agilent-019597 FHM_Denslow_8x15K [Feature Number version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

