TITLE
Protein Microarrays Discover Angiotensinogen and PRKRIP1 as Novel Targets for Autoantibodies in Chronic Renal Disease

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Biomarkers for early detection of chronic kidney disease are needed, as millions of patients suffer from chronic diseases predisposing them to kidney failure. Protein microarrays may hold utility in the discovery of auto-antibodies in other conditions not commonly considered auto-immune diseases. We hypothesized that proteins are released as a consequence of damage at a cellular level during end-organ damage from renal injury, not otherwise recognized as self-antigens, and an adaptive humoral immune response to these proteins might be detected in the blood, as a non-invasive tracker of this injury. The resultant antibodies (Ab) detected in the blood would serve as effective biomarkers for occult renal injury, enabling earlier clinical detection of chronic kidney disease than currently possible, due to the redundancy of the serum creatinine as a biomarker for early kidney injury. To screen for novel autoantibodies in chronic kidney disease, 24 protein microarrays were used to compare serum Ab from patients with chronic kidney disease against matched controls.  From a panel of 38 antigens with increased Ab binding, 4 were validated in 71 individuals, with (n=50) and without (n=21) renal insufficiency.  Significant elevations in the titer of novel auto-Ab were noted against Angiotensinogen (AGT) and PRKRIP1 in renal insufficiency.  Current validation is underway to evaluate if these auto-Ab can provide means to follow the evolution of chronic kidney disease in patients with early stages of renal insufficiency, and if these rising titers of these auto-Ab correlate with the rate of progression of chronic kidney disease.

DESIGN
Serum antibodies were profiled for 7 healthy individuals and 17 patients with chronic kidney disease, using the Invitrogen ProtoArray® Human Protein Microarray v3.0 platform (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). This platform contains 5,056 non-redundant human proteins expressed in a baculovirus system, purified from insect cells and printed in duplicate onto a nitrocellulose-coated glass slide. Each protein is spotted twice on each array, to measure the quality of the signal intensity. Details for experiment processing and analysis follow the previous publication from our group (Li et al Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Mar 17;106(11):4148-53). Prospector software was used to retrieve the expression based on immune response profiling of the .gal files.

PLATFORM
GPL6454 ProtoArray Human Protein Microarray v3.0

CITATIONS
21183621

