TITLE
Somatic cell nuclear reprogramming by mouse oocytes endures beyond reproductive decline

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The mammalian oocyte has the unique feature of supporting fertilization and normal development while being able of reprogramming the nuclei of somatic cells towards pluripotency and occasionally even totipotency. Whilst oocyte quality is known to decay with somatic aging it is not a given that different biological functions decay concurrently. In this study we tested whether oocyte reprogramming ability decreases with somatic aging. We show that oocytes isolated from mice aged beyond the usual reproductive age (climacteric) yield ooplasts that retain reprogramming capacity after somatic nuclear transfer (SCNT) at levels similar to ooplasts of young donors. Despite differences in transcriptome between ooplasts of old and young mice gene expression profiles of the resultant SCNT blastocysts were very similar. Furthermore albeit results showing global down-regulation of apoptosis-related genes in climacteric ooplasts and the reported beneficial effect of inhibiting p53 on transcription factor-induced (iPS) pluripotency reprogramming capacity of young ooplasts was not affected by specifically blocking p53. Our observations strongly suggest that the outcome of oocyte-induced reprogramming is determined by the availability of intrinsic reprogramming factors tightly regulated throughout aging as well as intracellular and environmental checkpoints during pre-implantation development towards selection of the successfully reprogrammed embryos. While oocytes are not regenerated but rather last for life we further propose that these cells can still be a resource for somatic reprogramming when they cease to be considered safe for sexual reproduction. Total mRNA was isolated for samples from young and climacteric mice (pools of 20 ooplasts and 20 SCNT blastocysts in duplicate) using a RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen Valencia CA USA) as described by the manufacturer (no DNase treatment). RNA concentrations as well as purity and integrity check were determined with Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 and RNA Pico 6000 Lab-Chip Kit (Agilent Technologies Palo Alto CA USA). RiboAmp HS Plus Amplification Kit (MDS Analytical Technologies Ismaning Germany) was used to amplify the total mRNA with two rounds of amplification according to the manufacturerâ??s instructions. Amplified RNA was eluted with 15 ÂµL RE Buffer included in the RiboAmp HS Plus Amplification Kit. RNA concentrations were determined with Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 and RNA Pico 6000 Lab-Chip Kit. Turbo Labeling CY3 Kit (MDS Analytical Technologies) was used to label 3 Âµg of amplified RNA with Cy3. Concentration and frequency of incorporation were measured with NanoPhotometer (Implen). Microarray wash and detection of the labeled RNA on GeneChips were carried out according to the manufacturerâ??s instructions (Agilent Technologies). Gene expression profiling was performed using Agilent Whole Mouse Genome Oligo Microarrays (4 x 44k each array containing 41174 features). Array image acquisition and feature extraction was performed using Agilent G2505B Microarray Scanner and Feature Extraction software v.9.5 (Agilent Technologies).

DESIGN
6 samples were analyzed. YoungOoplasts: young ooplasts 1 biological rep ClimactericOoplasts: climacteric ooplasts 1 biological rep YoungBlastocysts: young blastocysts 2 biological rep ClimactericBlastocysts: climacteric blastocysts 2 biological rep

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

