TITLE
The conjunctival transcriptome in scarring trachoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Trachoma is a poorly understood immuno-fibrogenic disease process, initiated by Chlamydia trachomatis (Ct). Differences in conjunctival gene expression profiles between Ethiopians with trachomatous trichiasis (with (TTI) and without (TT) inflammation) and controls (NC) were investigated to identify relevant host responses. Tarsal conjunctival swab samples were collected for RNA isolation and Ct PCR. Transcriptome-wide microarray experiments were conducted on 42 samples (TTI 13, TT 15, NC14). Specific results were confirmed using multiplex quantitative RT-PCR for 16 mRNA targets in an independent collection of case-control samples: 386 case-control pairs (TTI 244, TT 142, NC 386). The gene expression profiles of cases were consistent with: squamous metaplasia (Keratins, SPRR), pro-inflammatory cytokine production (IL-1β, CXCL5, S100A7) and tissue remodelling (MMP7, MMP9, MMP12, HAS3). There was no difference in the level of IFNG between cases and controls. However, cases had increased INDO, NOS2A, and IL13RA2 and reduced IL13. Ct was detected in 1/772. Cases show evidence of ongoing inflammation and tissue remodelling, which were more marked where clinical inflammation was also present. Significantly, these processes appear to be active in the absence of current Ct infection. There was limited evidence of a TH1 response (INDO, NOS2A) and no association between a TH2 response and cases. The epithelium appears actively involved in late cicatricial stages of trachoma through production of pro-inflammatory factors (IL-1β, CXCL5, S100A7). Longitudinal studies are needed to investigate which aetiological factors and pathways are associated with progressive scarring and whether simply controlling chlamydial infection will halt progression in people with established cicatricial disease.

DESIGN
Case - control study. Conjunctival swab samples were collected from people with trachomatous trichiasis with (TTI) and without (TT) clinically visable inflammation compared to normal controls (C). Total RNA extracted and analysed on the Illumina WG-6 platrom. Additional extensive qRT-PCR work done on a large set of case-control pairs.

PLATFORM
GPL6884 Illumina HumanWG-6 v3.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
20937763

