TITLE
Purified mesenchymal stem cells are an efficient source for iPS cell induction

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The ectopic expression of a defined set of transcription factors, Oct4, Klf4, Sox2, and c-Myc, reprograms mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and adult tail-tip fibroblasts (TTFs) into embryonic stem (ES)-like cells called induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells.  iPS cells have been generated from a variety of somatic cells, including embryonic and adult dermal fibroblasts, epithelial cells of the liver and stomach, pancreatic b cells, mature B lymphocytes, and adult neural stem cells (NSCs).  While these studies demonstrated that most somatic cells are capable of acquiring pluripotency with minimal gene transduction, the poor efficiency of cell reprogramming and the uneven quality of iPS cells are still important problems.  In particular, the choice of cell type most suitable for inducing high-quality iPS cells remains unclear.  Here, we generated iPS cells from PDGFRa+ Sca-1+ (PaS) cells that represent highly enriched adult mouse mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and PDGFRa- Sca-1- osteo-progenitor (OP) cells. When we compared the induction efficiency and quality of individual iPS clones, MSCs had a higher reprogramming efficiency compared with OP cells and TTFs.  The iPS cells induced from MSCs by Oct3/4, Sox2, and Klf4 appeared to be the closest equivalent to ES cells by DNA microarray gene profile and germline-transmission efficiency.  We conclude that prospectively isolated MSCs are a promising candidate for the efficient and stable generation of high-quality iPS cells.

DESIGN
Previously report that iPS cell raise two possibilities: 1) embryonic tissue is a better source for iPS cells than adult tissue, and 2) tissue stem cells are more suitable for reprogramming than differentiated cells.  To test our hypothesis that stem cells are more efficiently reprogrammed into iPS cells than mature cells, we needed to compare cells from the same cell lineage but from distinct developmental stages. we compared three cell sources including PaS (MSCs), OP (Osteo progenitor cells), TTF, ES cell, and thirty iPS lines.

