TITLE
Expression analysis of stimulated macrophages from CEBPB-knockout, CEBPE-knockout, and CEBPB/CEBPE double-knockout mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (CEBPs) are transcription factors involved in hematopoietic cell development and induction of several inflammatory mediators. Here, we generated CEBP-beta (CEBPB) and CEBP-epsilon (CEBPE) double-knockout (bbee) mice and compared their phenotypes to those of single-deficient (bbEE and BBee) and wild-type (BBEE) mice. The bbee mice were highly susceptible to fatal infections and died within 2-3 months. Morphologically, their neutrophils were blocked at the myelocytes/metamyelocytes stage, and clonogenic assays of bone marrow cells indicated a significant decrease in the number of myeloid colonies of the bbee mice. In addition, the proportion of hematopoietic progenitor cells [Lin(-)Sca1(+)c-Kit(+)] in the bone marrow of the bbee mice was significantly increased, reflecting the defective differentiation of the myeloid compartment. Furthermore, microarray expression analysis of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)- and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)-activated bone marrow-derived macrophages from bbee compared to single knockout mice revealed decreased expression of essential immune response-related genes and networks, including some direct CEBP targets such as Marco and Clec4e. Overall, the phenotype of the bbee mice is distinct from either the bbEE or BBee mice, demonstrating that both transcription factors are crucial for the maturation of neutrophils and macrophages, as well as the innate immune system, and can at least in part compensate for each other in the single knockout mice.

DESIGN
To rule out the regulatory influence of both CEBPB and CEBPE on macrophage-related genes, expression analysis of bone marrow-derived macrophages was performed. Macrophages were derived from murine bone marrow with the use of murine M-CSF. The macrophages were stimulated with both LPS (100 ng) and IFN-gamma (100 ng) for 24h, and RNA was extracted for array analysis. Overall, RNA was extracted from stimulated macrophages of one WT mouse, one CEBPB-KO mouse, one CEBPE-KO mouse and one double-KO mouse.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21072215

