TITLE
Tissue-type specific estrogen signaling in breast and uterine cancer cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Estrogen receptors play critical roles in both the normal physiological, and disease states of numerous tissues, including breast and uterus. Estrogen receptor alpha (ER) can activate or repress the expression of target genes upon estrogen stimulation. In order to better understand the transcriptional network of ER in breast  and uterus, we generated genome wide maps of  ER binding sites (ERBS) and gene expression profiles in breast cancer cells (MCF7 and T47D) and uterine cancer cells (ECC1 and Ishikawa) through ChIP-Seq and microarray techniques. Surprisingly, we identified large scale differences in the numbers of ERBS between these cell lines when treated with E2 (17-β estradiol). Besides identification of common and unique ERBS between breast and uterine cancer cell types., our data also suggest that both cell types could recruit a large set of common co-operating transcription factors (Co-TFs) and a few unique Co-TFs as well. Besides the genes that are commonly regulated between the different cell lines, there are a number of genes that are differentially regulated in different cell types. Gene pathway analyses of E2 target genes suggest that ER regulates many biological pathways and processes in both tissue-type dependent and independent manners. Our results showed that cell lines derived from same tissue display a greater similarity for both profiles of ERBS and gene expression, and that the differential profiles of ER and preferential recruitment of some Co-TFs are the main determinants for the differential regulation of E2 signaling in breast and uterine cancer cells.

DESIGN
In order to explore common and distinctive features of ERα (estrogen receptor alpha) binding profiles between breast and uterus, we generated eight ChIP-Seq libraries for the four cell lines (MCF7, T47D, ECC1 and Ishikawa) under two different treatments (E2, ethanol). In addition, we generated four control libraries for the four cell lines. For all treatment libraries, we generated about 7-12 million unique tags each. ER antibody catalog number is (Santa Cruz,sc-543).

