TITLE
Apoptosis, autophagy and senescence protect BRAFV600E nevi from malignant transformation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The oncogenic mutation BRAFV600E is a common event in nevi and melanomas, which  are aggressive skin tumors characterized by MAPK signaling pathway activation.  It has been observed that mutated benign melanocytic lesions can remain unchanged for decades, but also proliferate or undergo oncogene-induced senescence. The purpose of this study was to investigate the presence of a gene expression signature in BRAFV600E mutated nevi compared to wild-type ones, all derived from sun exposed sites. Microdissected tissues from excisional biopsies of acquired nevi were analyzed to detect the presence of BRAF and NRAS mutations and to profile whole genome expression by means of oligonucleotide microarrays. BRAFV600E mutation was evidenced in 64% of nevi, while no NRAS mutations were detected. Functional analysis of genes differentially expressed between wild-type and mutated lesions pointed out the role of oxidative stress in causing the oncogenic BRAF mutation and that the direct consequence of constitutive activation of BRAF-MEK-ERK pathway, in a benign contest, is the activation of apoptosis, autophagy and senescence. Our data also indicate that in mutated lesions, p53 plays a crucial role in the maintenance of the benign status.

DESIGN
In our study, in order to understand the role of BRAF mutation in acquired nevi, we performed gene expression profiling analysis on fourteen lesions derived from intermittently exposed sites, using whole genome oligonucleotide microarrays. Expression data were coupled with sequencing results on BRAF and NRAS genes and class comparison algorithms were applied to detect sequences differentially expressed between BRAFV600E and BRAFwt-NRASwt lesions. Some of the obtained results were further validated by Real-Time RT-PCR on an independent cohort of samples. Mutation analysis evidenced BRAF mutations in 64% of the common acquired nevi. All the mutations consisted in the substitution V600E (T1799A). No alteration was found on exon 11 of the BRAF gene nor on exons 1 and 2 of the NRAS gene, as expected since no lesion came from chronically exposed sites. Transcriptome analysis was carried out using oligo-microarrays and differential expression was tested applying the Linear Models package LIMMA available at www.bioconductor.org that uses Bayesian statistics to compute the probability of a gene being differentially expressed. Only 25 transcripts had B value greater then 2. We then performed a one-way ANOVA, dividing samples into three classes according to their BRAF mutational status (wt, ++, +++) as assessed by pyrosequencing. We found 2882 known transcripts by selecting those with ANOVA p-value < 0.01 and increasing or decreasing expression trends along the three classes. Functional analysis was performed using the MetaCoreTM software package to identify  overrepresented functional processes. BRAF signature, acquired nevi, gene expression profiling " ++ and +++ " refer to the percentage of alleles carrying the mutation in the *BRAF*V600E lesions. This has been assessed by pyrosequencing analysis (Venesio et al, 2008. PMID= 18408659).

PLATFORM
GPL1708 Agilent-012391 Whole Human Genome Oligo Microarray G4112A (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

