TITLE
Site-specific heterogeneity of melanocytes in human skin

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Little is known about the mechanisms underlying the localization of human melanocytes during embryogenesis, and how the characteristics of melanocytes differ in various body sites. Immunohistochemical studies of biopsy tissue obtained from four different anatomic sites (scalp, back, abdomen, and sole) of 31 aborted fetuses following the approval of the ethics committee for the study of human gene analysis revealed that the melanocyte-associated marker gp100 was expressed earlier in embryogenesis than other melanocyte markers. Human fetal melanocytes are initially localized in the epidermis, and then migrate to the hair buds from the epidermis but not the dermis. In the sole, melanocytes localize in eccrine sweat gland ducts. Cultured fetal melanocytes did not stain positively for any melanocyte markers other than MITF and nestin. When co-cultured with normal human keratinocytes and fibroblasts, fetal melanocytes stained positively for gp100. Gene expression studies indicated that fetal melanocytes were topographically diverse, especially sole-derived melanocytes compared with other melanocytes. Expression of several genes, including CHI3L1 and FGF7, was higher in sole-derived melanocytes. These findings suggest that human fetal melanocytes derived from the sole have different profiles both in vivo and in vitro compared with melanocytes from other sites.

DESIGN
In this study, microarray analyses were performed using cultured fetal melanocytes from 4 different sites (scalp, back, abdomen and sole) obtained at 19WG(case27), 13WG(case29), 17WG(case30) and newborn normal epidermal melanocyte as a control.  RNA purification was performed using an RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, Germany) and those 5 samples, were analyzed using GeneChip 1.0 ST Array (Affymetrix, CA, USA).

PLATFORM
GPL6244 [HuGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

