TITLE
Adult human liver tissue expression (Affymetrix)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The human liver plays a vital role in meeting the body's metabolic needs and maintaining homeostasis. To address the molecular mechanisms of liver function, we integrated multiple gene expression datasets from microarray, MPSS, SAGE and EST platforms to generate a transcriptome atlas of the normal human liver. The integrated liver transcriptome data should provide a valuable resource for the in-depth understanding of human liver biology and liver disease. Microarray is one of these platforms. In this part, adult human liver tissues from 10 adult human were surgically resected due to hemangioma in the liver. The gene expression of normal human liver was detected by Microarray platform.

DESIGN
The samples were obtained from the portion unaffected by the hemangioma and were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. All procedures and risks were explained verbally, and patients provided written consent. The samples were sectioned and confirmed to be histologically normal. All laboratory data assessing hepatic function were within normal ranges, including serum alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, albumin, prothrombin activity, glucose, cholesterol, and triglycerides (data not shown). Serological tests for hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C virus antibodies, and human immunodeficiency virus antibodies also proved negative. Neither heavy alcohol consumption nor the intake of prescription or other drugs was observed before surgical resection. Total RNA was extracted according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and RNase-free DNase I was used to remove DNA contamination. Nucleic acid concentration and purity were assessed at 260 nm using a spectrophotometer (DU 530, Beckman-Coulter Inc., Fullerton, CA), and the quality was assessed using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. In order to address gene expression polymorphism, the total RNA from 10 livers was pooled. ***This submission represents the Affymetrix component of the study only***

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

