TITLE
Therapy with bone marrow cells recovers gene expression alterations in hearts of mice with chronic chagasic cardiomyopathy

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Chronic chagasic cardiomyopathy is one of the leading causes of heart failure in Latin American countries, being associated with intense inflammatory response and fibrosis. We have previously shown that bone marrow mononuclear cell (BMC) transplantation improves inflammation, fibrosis and ventricular diameter in hearts of mice with chronic Chagas’ disease. Here we investigated alterations of gene expression in the hearts of chronic chagasic mice submitted or not to BMC therapy. C57Bl/6 mice chronically infected with T. cruzi (6 months) were transplanted with BMC or saline i.v. and sacrificed 2 months later. RNA was extracted from the hearts of normal controls, chagasic and BMC transplanted mice and microarray analysis was performed using MO30k oligonucleotide arrays.  Out of the 9390 unigenes quantified in all samples, 1702 had their expression altered in chronic chagasic hearts compared to those of normal mice. Major categories of significantly upregulated genes were related to inflammation, fibrosis and immune responses, while genes involved in mitochondrion function were downregulated. When BMC-treated chagasic hearts were compared to infected mice, 1631 (96%) of the alterations detected in infected hearts were not found, although an additional 109 genes were altered by treatment, indicating a remarkable 84% transcriptomic recovery. Immunofluorescence and morphometric analyses confirmed the effects of BMC therapy in the pattern of inflammatory-immune response and expression of adhesion molecules. Our results demonstrate important immunomodulatory effects of BMC therapy in chagasic cardiomyopathy and indicate potentially relevant factors involved in the pathogenesis of the disease that may provide new therapeutic targets.

DESIGN
We compared RNA samples extracted from whole hearts of 4 control, 4 chagasic and 4 BMC-treated chagasic mice by analyzing hybridization to microarrays printed by Duke University ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gove/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GPL8938 ) spotted with MO30k mouse Operon version 3.0 70-mer oligonucleotides. The hybridization protocol (see Soares et al, 2010), the slide type and the scanner settings were uniform throughout the entire experiment to minimize the technical noise. Briefly, 20 ug total RNA extracted in Trizol from each of the twelve samples (individual hearts) was reverse transcribed in the presence of fluorescent Alexa Fluor® 555- and Alexa Fluor®647-aha-dUTPs (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) to obtain labeled cDNA. Red and green labeled samples of biological replicas were then co-hybridized (“multiple yellow” strategy, 22) overnight at 50° C. After washing (0.1% SDS and 1% SSC) to remove the non-hybridized cDNA, each array was scanned at 630V (635 nm) and 580V (532 nm) with GenePix 4100B scanner (Axon Instruments, Union City, CA) and images were primarily analyzed with GenePixPro 6.0 (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA). Microarray data were processed as described previously (Soares et al, 2010).  A gene was considered as significantly up- or down-regulated when comparing four hearts from one condition to those from another if the absolute fold change was > 1.5x and the p-vlaue of the Sutdent”s heteroscedastic t-test of equality of the means of the distributions with a Bonferroni-type adjustment for each redundancy group (set of spots probing the same gene) was < 0.05.

PLATFORM
GPL8938 Duke Mouse 30k Oligonucleotide Array Operon V3.0.1

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

