TITLE
Proteomic analysis of pervanadate-induced tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins in hepatocellular carcinoma WRL 68 cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Proteomic analysis of pervanadate-induced tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins in hepatocellular carcinoma WRL 68 cells Protein tyrosine phosphorylation plays critical roles in modulating biological processes such as cellular proliferation, differentiation, migration, apoptosis and metabolism. To profile tyrosine phosphorylated (pTyr) proteins as well as search novel pTyr proteins as cross-talk points among different cellular pathways, we developed a rapid and efficient approach to identify cellular pTyr proteins and their complexes by a combination of subcellular proteomics approach with signal transduction strategies. Human hepatocytic cells from WRL68 cell line were treated with pervanadate (POV), subfractionated into four fractions and then subjected to immunoaffinity purification with anti-pTyr antibody. The eluted mixtures of the anti-pTyr purification were identified by LC-MS/MS. Subcellular fractionation and affinity purification of tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins: WRL68 cells were first grown to 80% confluence in MEM complete medium and then the medium replaced with serum free media. After 15 h, the cells were either untreated or stimulated with 0.1 mM pervanadate (1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 3 mM H2O2) for 10 min. 150-mm cultures of WRL 68 cells were rinsed twice with 4? PBS and then scraped from the dish in 750?l of hypotonic buffer (10 mM Tris, 1 mM NaF, 10 mM IAA, pH 7.5) containing a cocktail of protein inhibitors. After a 20-min incubation on ice, the cells were passed about five times through a 25-g needle. The resulting lysate was subjected to a 15min centrifugation at 1000 rpm at 4?, after which the pellet was resuspended in 250?l of hypotonic buffer and re-extracted by a second round of the trituration and centrifugation. The supernatants of the first and second spins were combined, adjusted to 0.25 M NaCl, and separated into cytosolic (supernatant) and membrane (pellet) fractions bycentrifugation at 19,000 rpm (43,000 g) for 90 min at 4?. All the pellets and total cell lysate were resuspended in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 1% deoxycholic acid sodium) containing 1mM pervanadate with a cocktail of protein inhibitors with sonication aid. Cleared cell lysates were incubated overnight at 4? with 30?l monoclonal anti-phosphotyrosine-agrose (Sigma). Precipitated immune complexes were washed three times with 1×HNTG (20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 10% Glycerol, pH 7.5) and then eluted with 100 mM phenyl phosphate (Sigma) in lysis buffer at 4?. Enzyme digestion, mass spectrometry and protein identification: The sample was digested according to the published method. Chromatography was performed using a surveyor LC system (Thermo Finnigan,SanJose,CA) on C18 reverse phase column(RP, 180 µm x 150 mm, BioBasic® C18, 5 µm, Thermo Hypersil-Keystone). The pump flow rate is split 1:100 for a colum flow rate of 1.5 µL/min.The column effluent is directly electrosprayed using the orthogonal metal needle source without further splitting.Mobile phase A is 0.1% formic acid in water,and the B mobile phase is 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The separation of peptides obtained by enzymatic digest of bile sample was achieved with a gradient of 2-80% B over 360 min.The column effluent from the reverse phase column was analyzed by LCQ Deca XP ion-trap mass spectrometer.The micro-electrospray interface uses a 30 µm metal needle that is orthogonal to the inlet of the LCQ.The mass spectrometer was set that one full MS scan was followed by three MS/MS scans on the three most intense ion from the MS spectrum with the following Dynamic Exclusion™ settings: repeat count, 1; repeat duration, 0.5 min; exclusion duration, 3.0 min. The acquired MS/MS spectra were automatically searched against protein database for human proteins (SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL) using the TurboSEQUEST program in the BioWorks™ 3.0 software suite. An accepted SEQUEST result had to have a ?Cn score of at least 0.1 (regardless of charge state) and Xcorr (one charge?1.5, two charges?2.0, three charges?2.5). Single peptides that alone identify a protein were manually validated after meeting the above criteria. Bioinformatics analysis: The pI and MW of the proteins were analyzed using ExPASy proteomics tools accessed from The grand average hydropathicity (GRAVY) values were determined according to Kyte-Doolittle. The protein subcellular location annotation was from SwissProt & TrEMBL protein database ( ). The protein function family was categorized according to Gene Ontology (GO) annotation terms extracted by InterPro ( ). The annotation of protein phosphorylation was from SwissProt & TrEMBL protein database ( ) and PhosphoSite ( ). The kinases were annotated according to human kinome. Keywords: other

