TITLE
Emergence of Non-Random Chromosomal Alterations (Trisomy 7 and 20) Derived from Diploid Human Colonic Epithelial Cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Aneuploidy from chromosomal instability is frequently detected in the vast majority of sporadic colorectal cancer patients and is believed to be an early driving force in disease progression. Despite this observation, the cellular advantages conferred by these cytogenetic alterations are poorly understood. We have isolated and immortalized non-transformed human colonic epithelial cells (HCECs) from non-cancerous biopsy tissue from a previous CRC patient undergoing routine colonoscopy. While these cells maintain a diploid karyotype under 2% serum conditions, we have isolated derivatives in serum-free culture with an extra copy of chromosome 7 (+7), a non-random trisomy detected in over 40% of human colorectal adenomas and carcinomas. We report here that +7 HCECs were not detectable in the initial cell population and appeared from an originally diploid population under serum-free culture conditions. The emergence of +7 cells correlates with a slight growth advantage that may be attributed to aberrant regulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor. We also provide evidence that +7 HCECs have defects in cell migration. A subpopulation with trisomy 20, another non-random chromosomal alteration in CRC, emerged following stable knockdown of TP53 and expression of oncogenic K-RASV12 in +7 HCECs. We describe isogenic HCECs that represent non-random cytogenetic changes occurring in sporadic colorectal cancer progression. These unique cellular reagents may serve as useful in vitro models for studying chromosomal instability-mediated tumorigenesis and the discovery of novel chemopreventive strategies.

DESIGN
Copy number analysis of Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP 5.0 Array was performed for immortalized human colonic epithelial cells that are either diploid or trisomy 7 for detection of large chromosomal amplifications or deletions.

