TITLE
Expression profile of subcutaneous adipose samples from subjects at the time of Roux en Y gastric bypass surgery.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
To map the genetics of gene expression in metabolically relevant tissues and investigate the diversity of expression SNPs (eSNPs) in multiple tissues from the same individual, we collected four tissues from approximately 1,000 patients undergoing Roux-en-y gastric bypass and clinical traits associated with their weight loss and co-morbidities. We then performed high-throughput genotyping and gene expression profiling and carried out a genome-wide association analyses for more than one hundred thousand gene expression traits representing four metabolically relevant tissues; liver, subcutaneous adipose, omental adipose and stomach. We successfully identified 24,531 eSNPs corresponding to ~10,000 distinct genes. This represents the greatest number of eSNPs identified to our knowledge by any study to date and the first study to identify eSNPs from stomach tissue.  We then demonstrate how these eSNPs provide a high quality disease map for each tissue in morbidly obese patients to not only inform genetic associations indentified in this cohort, but in previously published genome wide association studies as well.  eSNPs and gene co-expression modules identification in morbidly obese patients represent a great resource that will aid in elucidating the key networks associated with morbid obesity, response to RYGB and disease as a whole. Keywords: Tissue profiling in a human cohort.

DESIGN
Subcutaneous adipose tissue was collected from patients at the time of RYGB surgery at Massachusetts General Hospital between 2000 and 2007.  Samples were collected in RNAlater (Ambion/Applied Biosystems), stored at -80° and shipped to Rosetta Inpharmatics Gene Expression Laboratory Seattle, WA for extraction, amplification, labeling, and microarray processing.  Samples processed ranged in size from 100-200mg. Total RNA extracted from subcutaneous adipose was converted to fluorescently labeled cRNA that was hybridized to custom 44K DNA oligonucleotide microarrays manufactured by Agilent Technologies as described previously (Hughes et al. 2001; Schadt et al. 2008). Successful gene expression profiling results were collected from 701 subcutaneous adipose samples.

PLATFORM
GPL4372 Rosetta/Merck Human 44k 1.1 microarray

CITATIONS
21602305 , 23643386

