TITLE
Stressor  mRNA expression profiling of three different stressors in the water flea Daphnia magna

ORGANISM
Daphnia magna

SUMMARY
Microarray analyses were used to evaluate patterns of gene transcription following exposure of the waterflea Daphnia magna to two natural and one anthropogenic stressor. cDNA microarrays compiled of three life stage specific and three stressor-specific EST libraries, yielding 1734 different EST sequences, were used. We exposed the water flea Daphnia magna to three stressors known to exert strong selection in natural populations of this species i.e. a sublethal concentration of the pesticide carbaryl, infective spores of the endoparasite Pasteuria ramosa, and fish predation risk mimicked by exposure to fish kairomones. A total of 148 gene fragments were differentially expressed compared to the control. Most gene fragments were downregulated under stress (82.4% downregulation compared to 17.6% upregulation) irrespective of the treatment. In approximately 5% of the cases up- or downregulation depended on stressor identity. Based on a PCA, we could identify two different groups within our exposure treatments: small and big gene expression differences compared to the control condition. The treatments parasite 96h exposure, carbaryl 144h of exposure and fish 144h of exposure are combined in the high stress group.

DESIGN
26 samples x 2 biological replicates were analysed in a carriage wheel design (Khanin & Wit, 2005; Knapen et al., 2009) with a reference sample composed of a clutch of non-exposed D. magna that were collected at different time points ranging from 0-24h until three weeks old. The 26 samples included: 4 treatments (control, carbaryl, fish and parasite exposure) x three time points (48h, 96h and 144h) x 2 replicates + 2 start samples (non-exposed individuals younger than 24h old). This led to 52 different microarray hybridizations: 26 hybridizations for the inner part of the wheel, where every sample is hybridized against the reference, and another 26 for the outer part. Color flip experiments were incorporated per sample to fulfill the conditions of technical replicates on the level of labelling; every stressor-time combination was included at least once in red and once in green. One hybridization in the outer part of the wheel had technical problems, and is not included here.

PLATFORM
GPL10966 EBT_UA_Daphnia magna_Unique_1.9K_version1

CITATIONS
23564370

