TITLE
Unveiling the transcriptional features associated with coccolithovirus infection of natural Emiliania huxleyi blooms.

ORGANISM
marine metagenome

SUMMARY
Lytic viruses have been implicated in the massive cellular lysis observed during algal blooms, through which they assume a prominent role in oceanic carbon and nutrient flows. Despite their impact on biogeochemical cycling, the transcriptional dynamics of these important oceanic events is still poorly understood. Here, we employ an oligonucleotide microarray to monitor host (Emiliania huxleyi) and virus (coccolithovirus) transcriptomic features during the course of E. huxleyi blooms induced in seawater-based mesocosm enclosures. Host bloom development and subsequent coccolithovirus infection was associated with a major shift in transcriptional profile. In addition to the expected metabolic requirements typically associated with viral infection (amino acid and nucleotide metabolism, as well as transcription- and replication-associated functions), the results strongly suggest that the manipulation of lipid metabolism plays a fundamental role during host-virus interaction. The results herein reveal the scale, so far massively underestimated, of the transcriptional domination that occurs during coccolithovirus infection in the natural environment.

DESIGN
Six mesocosm enclosures were placed in the Raunefjorden (Western Norway coast) and filled with natural community water (in June 2008). Nutrient enrichment was applied in order to trigger the development of E. huxleyi blooms. The major transcriptomic features of those blooms and consequent viral infections were monitered through the use of an oligo microarray containing a total of 3571 gene probes; 2271 (63.6%) matching E. huxleyi ESTs, and 1300 (36.4%) matching EhV-86 and EhV-163 genomic sequences. Each microarray contains 5 technical replicates. Sampling of total RNA present  in 2L of water (from each enclosure) was performed once a day from day 8 to day 16. For enclosures 2 and 3 other sampling points were taken, covering the complete dial-cycle (6h,12h,18h, and 24h).

PLATFORM
GPL10968 Ehuxleyi_Coccolithovirus_V3

CITATIONS
22066669

