TITLE
Differential pulmonary gene expression in a nonhuman primate model of HIV-related COPD

ORGANISM
Macaca fascicularis

SUMMARY
HIV-infected persons are at increased risk for developing pulmonary diseases including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and the fungal opportunistic pathogen, Pneumocystis jirovecii (Pc) has been implicated in the pathogenesis of HIV-related COPD.  We previously developed a non-human primate model of HIV-related COPD using simian-human immunodeficiency virus (SHIV) and Pc co-infection in cynomolgus macaques.  In the present study we examined gene expression profiles in lung tissue from SHIV/Pc co-infected monkeys with COPD and compared them to SHIV-infected monkeys infected with normal lung function.  Microarray technology was used to develop gene profiles, and differential gene expression was determined by a comparative evaluation of competing normalization methods applied to our expression data set followed by validation using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis for select genes.  Of over 52,000 transcripts representing more than 20,000 genes analyzed, the SHIV/Pc infected macaques with COPD exhibited 243 differentially expressed (DE) genes compared to SHIV-infected monkeys with normal lung function.  DE genes fell into a number of functional categories which may be important in COPD development including: inflammation (pulmonary surfactants A2, B, C, D, upregulated; alternative macrophage activation-associated CC chemokine, upregulated), protease/antiprotease balance (cathepsin H, upregulated; alpha-1-chymotrypsin and secretory leukocyte peptidase inhibitor, downregulated), redox balance (glutathione peroxidase 4 and mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase 2, upregulated) and tissue homeostasis (connective tissue growth factor, downregulated; ornithine decarboxylase antizyme, upregulated). These results identify factors and pathways that may be involved in early development of Pneumocystis and SHIV-associated COPD and reveal several novel, potential therapeutic targets.

DESIGN
There are totally 11 samples in the experiment. The sample breakdown is as follows: KN14(group 1) is a true control in that the monkey was not infected with simian-human immunodeficiency virus (SHIV) nor was it colonized with Pneumocystis. KN02, KN03, KN07 and KN08 (group 2) are also controls of a sort. They were infected with SHIV but they did not become colonized with Pneumocystis. The remainder (KN01, KN04, KN06, KN11, KN12, KN13) (group3) were both infected with SHIV and colonized with Pneumocystis. The primary interest is in comparing the two SHIV-infected groups (2 and 3)

PLATFORM
GPL3535 [Rhesus] Affymetrix Rhesus Macaque Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

