TITLE
Time course of gene expression profiling in the liver of experimental mice infected with Echinococcus multilocularis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
For Samples GSM601017-28: The aim of this study was to use expression profiling to define transcriptional patterns and regulatory pathways that characterize the host liver response to E. multilocularis infection in the experimental model of secondary infection, to compare gene expression in this model to those described in the model of " primary infection " , and to follow the changes in gene expression and in the expression of a cell proliferation marker over time during the complete chronic phase of E.multilocularis infection, following early and middle stages. For Samples GSM601029-40: The aim of this study was to use expression profiling to define transcriptional patterns and regulatory pathways that characterize the host liver response to E. multilocularis infection in the experimental model of secondary infection, to compare gene expression in this model to those described in the model of " primary infection " , and to follow the changes in gene expression and in the expression of a cell proliferation marker over time during the complete chronic phase of E.multilocularis infection, following its middle and late stages.

DESIGN
For Samples GSM601017-28: The anterior liver tissue sample of control mice group and alveolar echinococcosis mice group were obtained at each time point(1 month and 3 month). Biological replicates is 3. Then, total RNA from anterior liver of both groups were used as test sample, which labelled cy5 fluorescein, and the pool RNA of healthy BALB/c mice anterior liver was used as reference sample, which labelled cy3 fluorescein, and then hybridized to 32K Mouse Genome Array Genechips, representing about 25000 characterized murine genes. For Samples GSM601029-40: The anterior liver tissue sample of control mice group and alveolar echinococcosis mice group were obtained at each time point(2 month and 6 month). Biological replicates is 3. Then, total RNA from anterior liver of both groups were used as test sample, which labelled cy5 fluorescein, and the pool RNA of healthy BALB/c mice anterior liver was used as reference sample, which labelled cy3 fluorescein, and then hybridized to 36K Mouse Genome Array Genechips, representing about 25000 characterized murine genes.

PLATFORM
GPL10984 CapitalBio 32K Mouse Genome Array GPL10985 CapitalBio 36K Mouse Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

