TITLE
Evaluation of phenoxybenzamine in the CFA model of pain following gene expression studies and connectivity mapping

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Background:  We have previously used the rat 4 day Complete Freund's Adjuvant (CFA) model to screen compounds with potential to reduce osteoarthritic pain. The aim of this study was to identify genes altered in this model of osteoarthritic pain and use this information to infer analgesic potential of compounds based on their own gene expression profiles using the Connectivity Map approach. Results:  Using microarrays, we identified differentially expressed genes in L4 and L5 dorsal root ganglia (DRG) from rats that had received intraplantar CFA for 4 days compared to matched, untreated control animals. Analysis of these data indicated that the two groups were distinguishable by differences in genes important in immune responses, nerve growth and regeneration. This list of differentially expressed genes defined a “CFA signature”.  We used the Connectivity Map approach to identify pharmacologic agents in the Broad Institute Build02 database that had gene expression signatures that were inversely related (‘negatively connected’) with our CFA signature. To test the predictive nature of the Connectivity Map methodology, we tested phenoxybenzamine (an alpha adrenergic receptor antagonist) – one of the most negatively connected compounds identified in this database - for analgesic activity in the CFA model. Our results indicate that at 10mg/kg, phenoxybenzamine demonstrated analgesia comparable to that of Naproxen in this model. Conclusion:  Evaluation of phenoxybenzamine-induced analgesia in the current study lends support to the utility of the Connectivity Map approach for identifying compounds with analgesic properties in the CFA model.

DESIGN
A naive (control) group of rats (n = 6) and a group of rats injected with CFA (n = 6) were used for gene expression profiling experiments. One animal from the control group did not yield sufficient amount of RNA for microarray and thus was omitted from further processing. In total, 5 microarrays each from the 5 animals in the control group, and 6 microarrays each from the 6 animals in the CFA group were analyzed.

PLATFORM
GPL4135 Agilent-014879 Whole Rat Genome Microarray 4x44K G4131F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
20846436

