TITLE
Deep sequencing of grapevine flower and berry short RNA library for discovery of novel microRNAs and validation of precise sequences of grapevine microRNAs deposited in miRBase

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of non-coding RNA molecules which have significant gene regulation roles in organisms.  The advent of new high throughput sequencing technologies has enabled the revelation of novel miRNAs.  Although there are two recent reports on high throughput sequencing analysis of small RNA libraries from different organs of two grapevine wine varieties, there were significant divergence in the number and kinds of miRNAs sequenced in these studies.  More sequencing of small RNA libraries is still important for the discovery of novel miRNAs in grapevine.  Here, we initially constructed a small RNA library of flower and fruit tissues of a table grapevine cultivar ‘Summer Black’ and performed sequencing and analysis of sRNAs using the Illumina Solexa platform, expecting to discover more miRNAs related to the development of grapevine flowers and berries and the formation of dessert quality in grapevine berries.  Totally, 130 conserved grapevine miRNA (Vv-miRNA) belonging to 28 Vv-miRNA families were validated, and 92 novel potential grapevine-specific ones representing 80 unique ones were first discovered.  Forty-two (48.84%) of the novel miRNAs possessed differential semi-quantitative PCR expression profiles in various grapevine tissues that could further confirm their existence in the grapevine, among which twenty were expressed only in grapevine berries, indicating some fruit-specificity.  130 target genes for 46 novel miRNAs could be predicted.  The locations of these potential target genes on grapevine chromosomes and their complementary levels with the corresponding miRNAs were also analyzed.

DESIGN
Size fractionated small RNAs (16-30 bp) from total RNA extracts was ligated to 5' and 3' adapters, and reverse transcribed. After PCR amplification the sample was subjected to Solexa sequencing. The resultant 35nt sequence data were filtered according to base quality value. The remained sequences were used to trim 5' and 3' adaptors. The clean tags were used for further analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL9396 Illumina Genome Analyzer (Vitis vinifera)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

