TITLE
Identification and Characterization of Subpopulations within Human Embryonic Stem Cell Lines

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The Microarray study was designed to characterize the whole genome transcription profile of two subpopulations of H1 human embryonic stem cells we identified by size using flow cytometry.The heterogeneous nature of stem cells is an important issue in both research and therapeutic use in terms of directing cell lineage differentiation pathways, as well as self-renewal properties. Using flow cytometry we have identified two distinct subpopulations by size within the H1 and BGN1 human embryonic stem (hES) cell lines. Both populations express stem the cell markers Oct-4, Nanog, Tra-1-60, Tra-1-80 and SSea-4 and express very low levels of differentiation markers common to the three germ layers. To investigate if the two populations possessed different transcription profiles, we performed whole genome microarray analysis, and identified approximately 400 genes with significant differential expression (p < 0.01). Cloning experiments indicate that both populations are able to repopulate each other and maintain the parental population. The large cell population responds to retinoic acid (RA) differentiation as evidenced by greater than a 50% loss of gated cell number and loss of Oct-4 expression; while the small cell population number does not change and maintains Oct-4 protein expression.  The presence of these two populations could be vitally important with respect to stem cell therapy and research as they respond differently to differentiation signals, which may be important in directing stem cell differentiation for disease therapy.

DESIGN
Four independent biological sort repeats for each subpopulation of large and small were hybridized to Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 arrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). Starting with 1ug of total RNA, biotin-labeled cRNA was produced using the Affymetrix 3’ Amplification One-Cycle Target labeling kit according to manufacturer’s protocol. For each array, 15ug of amplified cRNAs were fragmented and hybridized to the array for 16 hours in a rotating hybridization oven using the Affymetrix Eukaryotic Target Hybridization Controls and protocol. Slides were stained and washed as indicated in the Antibody Amplification Stain for Eukaryotic Targets protocol using the Affymetrix Fluidics Station FS450. Arrays were then scanned with an Affymetrix Scanner 3000. Data was obtained using the Genechip® Operating Software and imported into the Rosetta Resolver system (version 7.1)(Rosetta Inpharmatics LLC, Seattle, WA).  Biological replicates were combined using an error-weighted average as described in Weng et al. 23 P-values and fold changes based on the ratio of small large were generated in Resolver and used as a threshold for selecting differentially expressed genes

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
22906706

