TITLE
LSD1, EDS1 and PAD4 Conditionally Regulate Cellular Signaling Homeostasis, Photosynthesis, Water Use Efficiency and Seed Yield in Arabidopsis

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
There is growing evidence that for a comprehensive insight into the function of plant genes it is crucial to assess their functionalities under a wide range of conditions. In this study we examined the role of LESION SIMULATING DISEASE1 (LSD1), ENHANCED DISEASE SUSCEPTIBILITY1 (EDS1) and PHYTOALEXIN DEFICIENT4 (PAD4) in the regulation of photosynthesis, water use efficiency (WUE), ROS/hormonal homeostasis and seed yield in Arabidopsis thaliana grown in the laboratory and in the field. We demonstrate that the LSD1 null mutant (lsd1), which is known to exhibit a runaway cell death in non-permissive conditions, proves to be more tolerant to combined drought and high-light stress than the wild type. Moreover, depending on growing conditions, it shows variations in WUE, salicylic acid and hydrogen peroxide concentrations, photosystem II maximum efficiency and in transcription profiles. However, despite these changes, lsd1 demonstrates similar seed yield under all tested conditions. All of these traits depend on EDS1 and PAD4. The differences in the pathways prevailing in the lsd1 in various growing environments are manifested by the significantly smaller number of transcripts deregulated in the field compared to the laboratory, with only 43 commonly regulated genes. Our data indicate that LSD1, EDS1 and PAD4 participate in the regulation of various molecular and physiological processes that influence Arabidopsis fitness. On the basis of these results we emphasize that the function of such important regulators as LSD1, EDS1 and PAD4 should be studied not only under stable laboratory conditions, but also in the environment abounding in multiple stresses.

DESIGN
Six genotypes x two conditions experiment including five-week-old WT (Ws), lsd1, pad4, eds1, eds1lsd1, and pad4lsd1 plants grown in laboratory or field conditions, hybridized in two loop-designs (lab and field). Two biological replicates. In total, 2 x 12 samples were hybridized on 24 Arabidopsis Gene Expression microarrays V4 (Agilent, two-color array) including color swap of replicate samples.

PLATFORM
GPL9020 Agilent-021169 Arabidopsis 4 Oligo Microarray (V4) (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
23400705

