TITLE
Transcriptomic analysis of milk somatic cells in mastitis resistant and susceptible sheep upon challenge with Staphylococcus epidermidis and Staphylococcus aureus

ORGANISM
Ovis aries

SUMMARY
Staphylococci are major pathogens in humans and animals and emerging antibiotic-resistant strains have further increased the importance of this health issue. The existence of a genetic basis of host response to bacterial infections has been widely documented but the underlying mechanisms and genes are still largely unknown. Previously, two divergent lines of sheep selected on their milk somatic cell count called high and low SCS lines, have been showed to be respectively more and less susceptible to intra mammary infections (IMI). Transcriptional profiling of milk somatic cells (MSC) of high and low SCS sheep infected successively by S. epidermidis and S. aureus was performed to provide enhanced knowledge about the genetic basis of differential host response to IMI with Staphylococci. Gene expression in MSC of high and low SCS sheep collected 12h post-challenge was performed on a 15K gene ovine oligoarray (Agilent). MSC were mainly neutrophils. The high number of differentially expressed genes between the two bacterial strains indicated, among others, increased number of T-cells in MSC after S. aureus, compared to S. epidermidis challenge. Differential regulation of 366 genes between resistant and susceptible animals was largely associated with immune and inflammatory response (including pathogen recognition TLR2 pathway and cell migration), signal transduction, cell proliferation and apoptosis. Close biological connection between most of differentially expressed genes into Ingenuity Pathway Analysis networks further indicated consistency between the genes that were differentially-expressed between resistant and susceptible animals. Gene profiling in high and low SCS sheep provided strong candidates for biological pathway and gene underlying genetically determined resistance and susceptibility towards Staphylococci infections opening new fields for further investigation.  Keywords: Staphylococcus epidermidis, Staphylococcus aureus, milk somatic cells, mammalian, transcriptome, immunity, mastitis

DESIGN
22 samples in a two-colour dye-swap experimental design

PLATFORM
GPL10427 Agilent-019921 Sheep Gene Expression Microarray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
21527017

