TITLE
Response of A549 cells treated with Aspergillus fumigatus [WT-GC_vs_PrtT-GC]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Response of A549 cells treated with Aspergillus fumigatus wild type germinating conidia (WT_GC) or PrtT protease deficient mutant conidia (PrtT-GC) or inert acrylic 2-4 micron beads (Beads) for 8h Aspergillus fumigatus is the most commonly encountered mold pathogen of humans, predominantly infecting the respiratory system. Colonization and penetration of the lung alveolar epithelium is a key but poorly understood step in the infection process. This study focused on identifying the transcriptional and cell-signaling responses activated in A549 alveolar carcinoma cells incubated in the presence of A. fumigatus wild-type and ΔPrtT protease-deficient germinating conidia and culture filtrates (CF). Microarray analysis of exposed A549 cells identified distinct classes of genes whose expression is altered in the presence of germinating conidia and CF and suggested the involvement of both NFkB and MAPK signaling pathways in mediating the cellular response. Phosphoprotein analysis of A549 cells confirmed that JNK and ERK1/2 are phosphorylated in response to CF treatment in a protease-dependent manner. Inhibition of JNK or ERK1/2 kinase activity substantially decreased CF-induced cell damage, including cell peeling, actin-cytoskeleton damage, and reduction in metabolic activity and necrotic death. These results suggest that inhibition of MAPK-mediated host responses to treatment with A. fumigatus CF decreases cellular damage, a finding with possible clinical implications.

DESIGN
2 independent controls (uninfected A549 cells) as ctrl3_1-2, 2 independent treatments of A549 cells with wild-type A. fumigatus germinating conidia (WT_GC_1-2 ) , 2 independent treatments of A549 cells with inert acrylic beads (Beads 1-2), 3 independent treatments of A549 cells with A. fumigatus prtT mutant germinating conidia (PrtT-GC_1-3).

PLATFORM
GPL6244 [HuGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
21412410

