TITLE
Drosophila miR-34 mechanistically links aging and neurodegeneration

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
This SuperSeries is composed of the SubSeries listed below.

DESIGN
Aging is the most prominent risk factor for human neurodegenerative disease, but underlying mechanisms that connect two processes are less well characterized.  With age, the brain undergoes functional decline and perhaps degeneration.  Such decline may not just contribute to normal aging, but also enhance susceptibility to and progression of age-related neurodegenerative diseases. Therefore, defining intrinsic factors and pathways that underline the normal integrity of the adult nervous system may lead to insights that potentially link aging and neurodegeneration.  Here, we report a highly conserved microRNA (miRNA), miR-34, as a modulator of aging and neurodegeneration.  Using Drosophila, we show that fly miR-34 expression is brain-enriched and strikingly upregulated with age.  Functional studies reveal that, whereas animals without miR-34 are normal as young adults, upon aging, they gradually show late-onset deficits characteristic of accelerated brain aging; these include a transcriptional signature of aged animals, coupled with rapid functional decline, loss of brain integrity, followed by a catastrophic decline in adult viability.  Moreover, upregulation of miR-34 protects against neurodegeneration induced by pathogenic human polyglutamine (polyQ) disease protein.  We next reveal a dramatic effect of miR-34 to silence the Eip74EF gene of steroid hormone pathways in the adult, which is crucial to maintain the normal aging.  Collectively, these data define a miR-34-mediated mechanism that specifically affects long-term integrity of the adult nervous system.  miR-34 function in Drosophila may thus present a link that functionally connects aging and neurodegeneration.  Our studies implicate essential roles of miRNA- dependent pathways in maintenance of the adult brain, disease pathogenesis and healthy aging.

PLATFORM
GPL1322 [Drosophila_2] Affymetrix Drosophila Genome 2.0 Array GPL11139 Exiqon Drosophila miRNA arrays

CITATIONS
22343898

