TITLE
whole brain gene expression pattern

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
We have used commercially available oligonucleotide arrays to measure the relative expression levels of > 10,000 genes and ESTs. Recent evidence suggested certain advantages of performing such expression experiments on two or more different platforms of oligonucleotide arrays.  Here we have used two oligonucleotide platforms, MG U74Av2.0 arrays from Affymetrix and CodeLink UniSet1 from GE Healthcare, to assess whole brain gene expression patterns in naive C57BL/6 and DBA/2J mice.  C57BL/6J (n = 5) and DBA/2J (n = 4) male mice, 25-30 g body weight, were obtained from Jackson Laboratories.  Animals were group-housed and quickly sacrificed by CO2 exposure according to a protocol approved by the UCHSC IACUC. Brains were rapidly removed and stored at -80oC until use. Whole brain was homogenized in lysis buffer using a Polytron, and total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy Midi Kit (Qiagen) following the protocol supplied by the manufacturer.  An additional clean-up of total RNA was carried out using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). Using the protocol supplied by the manufacturer, double-stranded cDNA was synthesized from the total RNA (4 ug of total RNA from an individual mouse brain was used for each array) and was used to obtain biotin-labeled cRNA by an in vitro transcription reaction.  Biotin-labeled cRNA was recovered using the RNeasy kit.  Biotin-labeled cRNA from each mouse was then fragmented and hybridized with two separate (duplicate) CodeLink BioArrays.  The average of the gene expression intensity values for each probe set from these technical replicates was used for data analysis.  The BioArrays were subsequently stained for 30 min with Cy5-Streptavidin and washed prior to scanning. For MG U74Av2 arrays,double-stranded cDNA was synthesized from 5 ug of total RNA, using the protocol supplied by the manufacturer, and used to obtain biotin-labeled cRNA by an in vitro transcription reaction.  Biotin-labeled cRNA was then fragmented and the quality of the fragmented cRNA was assessed using Test2 chips prior to hybridization with the Affymetrix arrays.  Hybridization of the cRNA with the Affymetrix arrays was carried out according to the manufacturer's protocol.  The arrays were stained with streptavidin-phycoerythrin conjugate and scanned by a GeneArray scanner. Keywords: other

