TITLE
Gene expression profiling of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The epilepsies represent one of the most common neurological disorders. Mesial temporal lobe epilepsies (MTLE) are the most frequent form of partial epilepsies and display frequent resistance to anti-epileptic drugs thus representing a major health care problem. In TLE, the origin of seizure activity typically involves the hippocampal formation, which displays major neuropathological features, described with the term hippocampal sclerosis (HS). HS is the most frequent pathological substrate of refractory mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. Complex partial seizures (CPS) are the predominant seizure type associated with medial temporal lobe epilepsy. MTLE is commonly due to mesial temporal sclerosis (MTS). The biology underlying the epilepstic seizures and the transcriptome associated to the seizure in intractable medial temporal lobe epilepsy is ill understood. The aim of the study was to identify potential biomarkers that could identify epileptic seizure. Thus we performed transcriptome profiling of ten medial temporal lobe epilepsy cases which are resistant to the drug and underwent temporal lobectomy. The cases constitutes of patients with intractable complex partial seizure, treated medically and have undergone detailed presurgical evaluation and subjected to surgery for standard temporal lobectomy and amygdalo-hippocampectomy. The spiking areas identified after the electrocorticography will form the test tissues, which compared with the nonspiking areas removed during the surgery, from the same patient. This could probably form one of the appropriate controls, as test and control are from same patient, which eliminates the genome variations that could incur due to the comparison with the tissues from the another patient. Also this could get rid of expression changes due to the treatments undergone by the patient.  We performed two color microarray wherein we labled seizure focus (spiking area) with Cy5 and non-seizure region tissues (non-spiking) with Cy3. As a strategy to test the possibility of potential diagnostic biomarkers we are intended to test the differentially regulated molecules in an independent set of epilepsy samples.

DESIGN
Two color experiment

PLATFORM
GPL4133 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Abhilash K. Venugopal, Ghantasala S. Sameer Kumar, Anita Mahadevan, Lakshmi Dhevi N. Selvan, Arivusudar Marimuthu,Jyoti Bajpai Dikshit, Pramila Tata, Ramachandra YL, Raghothama Chaerkady, Sanjib Sinha, Chandramouli BA, Arivazhagan A, Parthasarathy Satishchandra, Shankar SK and Akhilesh Pandey. Transcriptomic Profiling of Medial Temporal Lobe Epilepsy. Jan 30, 2012 - J Proteomics Bioinform 5: 031-039.  DOI:10.4172/jpb.1000210

