TITLE
Becker_etal_SNParray_BSA

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Bulk segregant analysis using microarrays, and extreme array mapping have recently been used to rapidly identify genomic regions associated with phenotypes in multiple species. These experiments, however require the identification of single feature polymorphisms between the cross parents for each new combination of genotypes, which raises the cost of experiments. The availability of the genomic polymorphism data in Arabidopsis thaliana, coupled with the efficient designs of Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) genotyping arrays removes the requirement for SFP detection and lowers the per array cost, thereby lowering the overall cost per experiment. To demonstrate that these approaches would be functional on SNP arrays and determine confidence intervals, we analyzed hybridizations of natural accessions to the Arabidopsis ATSNPTILE array and simulated BSA or XAM given a variety of gene models, populations, and bulk selection parameters. Our results show a striking degree of correlation between the genotyping output of both methods, which suggests that the benefit of SFP genotyping in context of BSA can be had with the cheaper, more efficient SNP arrays. As a final proof of concept, we hybridized the DNA from bulks of an F2 mapping population of a Sulfur and Selenium ionomics mutant to both the Arabidopsis ATTILE1R and ATSNPTILE arrays, which produced almost identical results. We have produced R scripts that prompt the user for the required parameters and perform the BSA analysis using the ATSNPTILE1 array and have provided them as supplemental data files. Keywords: genomic hybridization of inbred lines and bulked segregant analysis

DESIGN
Hybridizations of inbred parents for feasiblity studies and simulations as well as two hybs from a Bulk Segregant analysis. we measured the elemental profile of 412F2 plants from a cross between the Sulfur and Selenium mutant 78730 (in the Col-0 background) and the Ler-1 accession (Trays 1289-1290 and trays 1321-1323), data available at www.ionomicshub.org < http://www.ionomicshub.org > ). Leaves from the 31 highest and 33 lowest S+Se accumulating plants (calculated as a percentage of the Col-0 accumulation in the same growth tray) were pooled and the genomic DNA was extracted using Qiagen kits

PLATFORM
GPL1979 AtTile1F to Arabidopsis Tiling 1.0F GPL10855 Arabidopsis thaliana SNP-tiling array AtSNPtile ver. 2

CITATIONS
21297997

