TITLE
Expression data of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae 4074 in response to epinephrine and norepinephrine

ORGANISM
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae ; Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae serovar 1 str. 4074

SUMMARY
Bacteria can use host hormones as environment cue to modulate their pathogenic processes, which was discovered to play essential role in disease development. Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae is one of the most important porcine respiratory pathogens causing great economic losses in the pig industry worldwide. Stress factors were found to contribute to the outcome of A. pleuropneumoniae infection. To test whether A. pleuropneumoniae could respond to host stress hormone catecholamines, the gene expression profiles after epinephrine (Epi) and norepinephrine (NE) treatment were compared with the untreated bacteria using microarray. Although the bacterial growth was not affected in the conditions tested, 157 and 104 genes associated with various function categories including many virulence factors were differentially expressed by Epi and NE treatment. 18 common genes were regulated by the two hormones, these genes included genes encoding virulence factors and potential responsors of Epi and NE. Further investigations on virulence traits demonstrated that cytotoxic activity was enhanced by Epi but repressed by NE in accordance with the regulations on apxIA. Biofilm formation was not affected by the two hormones despite that the biofilm formation gene pgaB was affected. Adhesion to host cells was induced by NE but not by Epi, possibly involving other putative adhesins affected by the hormones in addition to the autotransporter adhesin (APL_0443). Our study demonstrated that A. pleuropneumoniae could actively respond to catecholamines to control its virulence traits. The different regulated genes and effects caused by Epi and NE suggested A. pleuropneumoniae may have multiple responsive systems to sense different type of catecholamine hormones.

DESIGN
Transcriptional profiles were analyzed using microarray to compared the epinephrine (Epi) or norepinephrine(NE) treated and untreated A. pleuropneumoniae. All samples were harvested from middle exponential phase (4 hours after sub-culture) at the OD600=1.435±0.065 for control, OD600=1.461±0.019 for Epi treated strain and OD600=1.545±0.115 for NE treated strain. Three biological replicates were conducted for each treatment. The total RNA were extracted and hybridized with the whole genome microarray of A. pleuropneumoniae. The signal intensities were normalized and transformed into log2 values. The genes with fold change ≥ 1.5 and P < 0.05 were selected as differentially expressed.

PLATFORM
GPL9691 Agilent-019883 Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae expression array

CITATIONS
22347439

