TITLE
Alteration of peripheral blood monocyte gene expression in humans following diesel exhaust inhalation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Epidemiologic associations between acutely increased cardiorespiratory morbidity and mortality and particulate air pollution are well-established, but the effects of acute pollution exposure on human gene expression changes are not well understood. Objectives: In order to identify potential mechanisms underlying epidemiologic associations between air pollution and morbidity, we explored changes in gene expression in humans following inhalation of fresh diesel exhaust (DE), a model for particulate air pollution. Methods: 14 ethnically homogeneous (white males), young, healthy subjects underwent sixty minute inhalation exposures on 2 separate days with clean air (CA) or freshly generated and diluted DE at a concentration of 300 μg/m3 PM2.5. Prior to and 24 hours following each session, whole blood was sampled and fractionated for PBMC isolation, RNA extraction, and generation of cDNA, followed by hybridization with Agilent Whole Human Genome (4X44K) arrays. Results: Oxidative stress and the ubiquitin proteasome pathway, as well as the coagulation system, were among hypothesized pathways identified by analysis of differentially expressed genes. Nine genes from these pathways were validated using real-time PCR comparing fold change in expression between DE exposed and clean (CA) days. Quantitative gene fold changes generated by real-time PCR were consistent with the directional fold changes from the microarray analysis. Conclusions: Changes in gene expression connected with key oxidative stress, protein degradation, and coagulation pathways are likely to underlie observed physiologic and clinical outcomes and suggest specific avenues and sensitive time points for further physiologic exploration.

DESIGN
Diesel exhaust inhalation exposure-induced human gene expression changes were measured in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. 14 white males subjects were seated in a controlled environment facility for 2 separate 60 minute inhalation exposures which occurred at least 1 week apart to either clean air and freshly generate or diluted diesel exhaust (300ug/m3 PM2.5) .Blood collection occurred immediately prior to and 24 hours following exposures. Two microarrays per subject were completed using Agilent Whole Human Genome (4X44K) arrays. Genes that were of interest to our research group were verified using Real Time PCR analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

