TITLE
RNA-seq analysis generated a comprehensive landscape of transcriptomes and revealed complex patterns of transcripts in Chinese HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
RNA-seq is a powerful tool for comprehensive characterization of whole transcriptome at both gene and exon levels and with a unique ability of identifying novel splicing variants. To date, RNA-seq analysis of HBV-related HCC has not been reported. In this study, we performed transcriptome analyses for 10 matched pairs of cancer and non-cancerous tissues from Chinese HBV-related hepatocelluar carcinoma patients using 36bp single-end sequencing approach on Solexa/Illumina GAII platform. On average, about 21.6 million sequencing reads and 10.6 million aligned reads were obtained for samples sequenced on each lane, which was able to identify > 50% of all the annotated genes for each sample. Furthermore, from by far the largest database of transcripts expressed in HCC tissues, we identified 1,378 significantly differently expressed genes (DEGs) and 24, 338 differentially expressed exons (DEEs). Comprehensive function analyses indicated that cell growth-related, metabolism-related and immune-related pathways were most significantly enriched by DEGs, pointing to a complex mechanism for HCC carcinogenesis. Positional gene enrichment analysis showed that DEGs were most significantly enriched at chromosome 8q21.3-24.3. The most interesting findings were from the analysis at exon levels where we characterized three major patterns of expression changes between gene levels and exon levels, implying a much complex landscape of transcript-specific differential expressions in HCC. Finally, we identified a novel highly up-regulated exon-exon junction in ATAD2 (ATPase family, AAA domain containing 2) gene in HCC tissues. Overall, to our best knowledge, our study represents the most comprehensive characterization of the HBV-related HCC transcriptome including exon level expression changes and novel splicing variants, which illustrated the power of RNA-seq and provided important clues for understanding the molecular mechanisms of HCC pathogenesis at system-wide levels.

DESIGN
A comprehensive analysis of transcriptome for 10 match-paired HBV-related Chinese HCC and non-cancerous adjacent tissues. Processed data files: Exon-level results, gene-level results, differentially expressed exons, and differently expressed genes (DEGs).

