TITLE
Analysis of the gene expression pattern of bovine blastocysts at three stages of development

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
Blastocyst formation is a primordial event of pre-implantation development since it is required for pregnancy establishment and progression. The blastocyst plays a pivotal role because it is the stage at which the embryo is transferred and starts coordinated cross-talks with the mother. It is also the terminal step of pre-implantation developmentbefore transfer; it reflects all stresses the embryo may have faced during the process of in-vitro treatment. Achieving the formation of a morphologically healthy blastocyst following normal kinetics is a good sign but remains a poor indicator of embryo quality. Considering the limitation of the invasive methods for competence assessment, the analysis of blastocysts’ gene expression is a promising way to improve our understanding of blastocyst formation and to study the effects of different treatments on gene expression. Methods: Early, expanded and hatched blastocysts were collected for RNA extraction, amplification, and cDNA microarray hybridization. Gene candidates (IFNt, PLAC8, SSLP1, AKR1B1, HNRNPA2B1, ARGFX, NANOS, CCNB1) were selected and confirmed using Q-RT-PCR to validate the microarray data. Results: Our analysis show that hatched blastocysts are enriched in genes transcripts implicated in implantation, cell adhesion and extracellular matrix digestion. Early blastocysts expressed genes mainly involved in cell cycle control, transcription and translation. Q-RT-PCR validated most microarray results (87.5%). Some of the differentially expressed genes are interesting as potential markers of competence. Conclusions: Overall, our study provides new insights into the molecular regulation of blastocyst formation. In addition, it could help assess blastocyst staging and select better embryos based on the expression of quality markers.

DESIGN
In the present study the Laval/Sirard_bovine_embryo_3K_V3.0 array was used to conduct a series of 18 hybridizations (for three Blastocysts stages (early, expended, hatched) with three biological replicates and dye swaps) in a loop design experiment.

