TITLE
A Novel Pro-Survival Function of Cyclin-D1 Underlies Its Oncogenic Role and Potential as a Therapeutic Target in Human and Murine Mantle Cell Lymphoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The chromosomal translocation t(11;14)(q13;q32) leading to cyclin-D1 over-expression plays an essential role in the development of mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), an aggressive tumor that   remains incurable with current therapies. Cyclin-D1 has been postulated as an effective therapeutic target, but its evaluation has been hampered by our incomplete understanding of its oncogenic functions and by the lack of valid MCL murine models. To address these issues, we generated a cyclin-D1-driven mouse model whereby cyclin-D1 expression can be externally regulated. These mice developed lymphomas capable of recapitulating most features of human MCL. We found that cyclin-D1 inactivation was not sufficient to induce lymphoma regression in vivo. However, using a combination of in vitro and in vivo assays, we identified a novel pro-survival cyclin-D1 function in MCL cells. Specifically, we demonstrate that cyclin-D1 sequestrates the pro-apoptotic protein BAX, thereby favoring BCL2 anti-apoptotic function. Accordingly, cyclin-D1 inhibition sensitized the lymphoma cells to apoptosis through BAX release. Thus, genetic or pharmacologic targeting of cyclin-D1 combined with a pro-apoptotic BH3 mimetic synergistically killed murine lymphomas and human MCL cells. Our study identifies a novel role of cyclin-D1 in deregulating apoptosis and highlights the potential benefit of simultaneously targeting cyclin-D1 and survival pathways in patients with MCL.

DESIGN
Dose response involving 20 samples. Two replicates for each cell line, 4 cell lines sensitive to ABT-737 and 6 cell lines resistant to ABT-737. Mantel cell lymphoma cell lines sensitive to ABT-737 vs. Mantel cell lymphoma cell lines resistant to ABT-737

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21746927

