TITLE
Severe alkaline pH stress induces a glucose starvation-related transcriptional response in S. cerevisiae

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
Alkaline pH stress invokes in S. cerevisiae a potent and fast transcriptional response that includes many genes repressed by glucose. Certain mutants in the glucose-sensing and response pathways, such as those lacking the Snf1 kinase, are sensitive to alkalinization. We show that addition of glucose to the medium improves growth of wild type cells at high pH, fully abolish the snf1 alkali-sensitive phenotype and attenuates high pH-induced Snf1 phosphorylation at Thr210. The elm1 mutant, lacking one of the three upstream Snf1 kinases (tos3, elm1 and sak1), is markedly alkali sensitive, whereas the phenotype of the tos3 elm1 sak1 strain is even stronger than that of snf1 cells and it is not fully rescued by glucose supplementation. DNA microarray analysis reveals that about 75% of genes induced at short term by high pH are also induced by glucose scarcity.  Snf1 mediates, in full or in part, the activation of a significant subset (38%) of short-term alkali-induced genes, including those coding high-affinity hexose transporters and phosphorylating enzymes. Induction of genes encoding enzymes involved in glycogen (but not trehalose) metabolism is largely dependent of the presence of Snf1. Therefore, the function of Snf1 in adaptation to glucose scarcity appears crucial for alkaline pH tolerance. Incorporation of micromolar amounts of iron and copper to a glucose-supplemented medium result in an additive effect and allows near normal growth at high pH, thus indicating that these three nutrients are key limiting factors for growth in an alkaline environment.

DESIGN
We identified the changes in the expression profiles caused by alkalinization of the medium (pH8 vs. pH5.5 for 10 min) in several strains: wild type cells (4 chips), snf1 mutant cells (4 chips) We also identified the transcriptomic changes that occur after glucose deprivation (0.05% vs 2% for 15 min) in: wild type cells (2 chips) snf1 mutant cells (2 chips) Total: 12 chips

PLATFORM
GPL4069 Yeast_ALL DNA chip

CITATIONS
22372618

