TITLE
Quinone-dependent D-lactate dehydrogenase Dld (Cg1027) is essential for growth of Corynebacterium glutamicum on D-lactate

ORGANISM
Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC 13032

SUMMARY
Corynebacterium glutamicum is able to grow with lactate as sole or combined carbon and energy source. Quinone-dependent L-lactate dehydrogenase LldD is known to be essential for utilization of L-lactate by C. glutamicum. D-lactate also serves as sole carbon source for C. glutamicum ATCC 13032. Here, the gene cg1027 was shown to encode the quinone-dependent D-lactate dehydrogenase (Dld) by enzymatic analysis of the protein purified from recombinant E. coli. The absorption spectrum of purified Dld indicated the presence of FAD as bound cofactor. Inactivation of dld resulted in the loss of the ability to grow with D-lactate, which could be restored by plasmid-borne expression of dld. Heterologous expression of dld from C. glutamicum ATCC 13032 in C. efficiens enabled this species to grow with D-lactate as sole carbon source. Homologs of dld of C. glutamicum ATCC 13032 are not encoded in the sequenced genomes of other corynebacteria and mycobacteria. However, the dld locus of C. glutamicum ATCC 13032 shares 2367 bp of 2372 bp identical nucleotides with the dld locus of Propionibacterium freudenreichii subsp. shermanii, a bacterium used in Swiss-type cheese making. Both loci are flanked by insertion sequences of the same family suggesting a possible event of horizontal gene transfer.

DESIGN
Three respectively two biological replicates were performed. To analyse how D-lactate influences global gene expression. DNA microarray analyses were performed. For this purpose RNA was isolated from exponentially growing cells cultivated in either complex media LB or LB+50 mM D-lactate and in CgXII medium containing a mixture of D- and L-lactate or only L-lactate as carbon source.

PLATFORM
GPL11253 Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC 13032 11K

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

