TITLE
Differential Expression of Chemokine and Matrix Re-Modelling Genes Explains Contrasting Schistosoma japonicum-induced Hepatopathology in Murine Models

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The pathological outcomes of schistosomiasis are largely dependent on the molecular and cellular mechanisms of the host immune response. In this study, we demonstrate the variation of host gene expression which underlies the contrasting hepatic pathology observed between two inbred mouse strains following schistosome infection. Whole genome microarray analysis was employed in conjunction with histological and immunohistochemical analysis to define and compare the hepatic gene expression profiles and cellular composition associated with the hepatopathology observed in BALB/c and CBA mice during an active Schistosoma japonicum infection. Here, we show that the transcriptional profiles differ significantly between the two mouse strains with high statistical confidence. We identified specific genes correlating with the more severe pathology associated with CBA mice, as well as genes which may confer the milder degree of pathology associated with BALB/c mice. Generally, up-regulated genes were largely associated with immune and inflammatory responses, antigen processing and cytokine/chemokine activity. In BALB/c mice, neutrophil genes exhibited striking increases in expression, which coincided with significantly greater accumulation of neutrophils at granulomatous regions, compared to CBA mice. In contrast, up-regulated expression of eosinophil chemokine CCL24 in CBA mice paralleled the cellular influx of eosinophils to the hepatic granulomas. Additionally, there was greater down-regulation of genes involved in metabolic processes in CBA mice, reflecting the greater degree of liver damage in these mice. Genes involved in fibrosis showed similar levels of expression in both mouse strains. Genes associated with Th1 and Th2 responses showed no significant differences in expression between strains. These results provide a more complete picture of the molecular and cellular mechanisms which govern the pathological outcome of hepatic schistosomiasis. Furthermore, this improved understanding of schistosome immunopathogenesis in the murine model will provide the basis for a better appreciation of the complexities associated with chronic human schistosomiasis.

DESIGN
The gene expression profile of  murine livers (BALB/c and CBA strains) were examined at 4, 7 and 9 weeks post infection with Schistosoma japonicum in comparison to that of uninfected controls. Three mice were utilised per group (Uninfected, 4, 7 and 9 weeks), totalling 24 samples. Microarray analysis was performed on individual RNA samples from each mouse.

PLATFORM
GPL6887 Illumina MouseWG-6 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
21666794

