TITLE
Genome profiling of mouse pulmonary epithelial type II cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Pulmonary alveoli contain two distinct populations of epithelial cells.  Type II cells produce pulmonary surfactant lipids and surfactant-associated proteins (SP) required for maintaining alveolar surface tension at the air-liquid interface and host defense against respiratory pathogens.  Type II cells are also progenitors for epithelial type I cells, a terminally differentiated elongated cell that covers microvascular endothelial cells and participates in gas exchange.   Despite some indirect evidence, it is unknown whether subpopulations of type II cells exist.   We created a line of transgenic mice expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) under control of the human SP-C promoter.  Expression of EGFP may define a subpopulation of type II cells because it is 1) expressed in approximately 10% of type II cells, 2) appears much later in embryonic development than SP-C, and 3) selectively proliferates in mice infected with influenza A virus.  To determine whether EGFP defines a unique subpopulation of type II cells, RNA was isolated from EGFP-positive and negative type II cells and hybridized to affymetrix arrays.  Of the genes detected in EGFP-positive cells, most were equally detected in EGFP-negative cells.  However, approximately 350 genes were selectively elevated ≥5-fold in EGFP-positive cells and 1500 genes selectively expressed by EGFP-negative cells.  These findings suggest EGFP defines a subpopulation of type II epithelial cells in this line of transgenic mice.

DESIGN
Type II cells were harvested from approximately 10 young adult (8-week) mice and sorted into EGFP-positive (sample EGFP-1) and EGFP-negative (sample nonEGFP-1) populations using a B-D FACSVantage SE cell sorter.  RNA was prepared from approximately two million cells and hybridized to Affymetrix M430 2.0 array as a one by one comparison.  The isolation and gene expression analysis of EGFP-positive and EGFP-negative type II cells was repeated a second (using EGFP-2 and nonEGFP-2 samples) and third (using EGFP-3 and nonEGFP-3 samples) time.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

