TITLE
Innate and adaptive immune responses associate with progressive histological damage of renal allografts

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
CONTEXT Slowly progressive chronic tubulo-interstitial damage jeopardizes long-term renal allograft survival. Both immune and non-immune mechanisms are thought to contribute, but the most promising targets for timely intervention have not been identified. OBJECTIVE In the current study we seek to determine the driving force behind progressive histological damage of renal allografts, without the interference of donor pathology, delayed graft function and acute graft rejection. DESIGN We used microarrays to examine whole genome expression profiles in renal allograft protocol biopsies, and analyzed the correlation between gene expression and the histological appearance over time. The gene expression profiles in these protocol biopsies were then compared with gene expression of biopsies with acute T-cell mediated rejection. PATIENTS Human renal allograft biopsies (N=120) were included: 96 rejection-free protocol biopsies and 24 biopsies with T-cell mediated acute rejection. RESULTS In this highly cross-validated study, we demonstrate the significant association of established, ongoing and future chronic histological damage with regulation of adaptive immune gene expression (T-cell and B-cell transcript sets) and innate immune response gene expression (dendritic cell, NK-cell, mast cell and granulocyte transcripts). We demonstrate the ability of gene expression analysis to perform as a quantitative marker for ongoing inflammation with a wide dynamic range: from subtle subhistological inflammation prior to development of chronic damage, over moderate subclinical inflammation associated with chronic histological damage, to marked inflammation of Banff-grade acute T-cell mediated rejection. CONCLUSION   Progressive chronic histological damage after kidney transplantation is associated with significant regulation of both innate and adaptive immune responses, months before the histological lesions appear. This study therefore corroborates the hypothesis that quantitative inflammation below the diagnostic threshold of classic T-cell or antibody-mediated rejection is associated with early subclinical stages of progressive renal allograft damage.

DESIGN
We used microarrays to examine whole genome expression profiles in renal allograft protocol biopsies, and analyzed the correlation between gene expression and the histological appearance over time. The gene expression profiles in these protocol biopsies were then compared with gene expression of biopsies with acute T-cell mediated rejection. Human renal allograft biopsies (N=120) were included: 96 rejection-free protocol biopsies and 24 biopsies with T-cell mediated acute rejection.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21881554

