TITLE
Gene expression profiling of the classical (CD14++CD16-), intermediate (CD14++CD16+) and nonclassical (CD14+CD16+) human monocyte subsets

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The new official nomenclature subdivides human monocytes into three subsets, classical (CD14++CD16-), intermediate (CD14++CD16+) and nonclassical (CD14+CD16+). Here, we comprehensively define relationships and unique characteristics of the three human monocyte subsets using microarray and flow cytometry analysis. Our analysis revealed that the intermediate and nonclassical monocyte subsets were most closely related. For the intermediate subset, majority of genes and surface markers were expressed at an intermediary level between the classical and nonclassical subset. There features therefore indicate a close and direct lineage relationship between the intermediate and nonclassical subset. From gene expression profiles, we define unique characteristics for each monocyte subset. Classical monocytes were functionally versatile, due to the expression of a wide range of sensing receptors and several members of the AP-1 transcription factor family. The intermediate subset was distinguished by high expression of MHC class II associated genes. The nonclassical subset were most highly differentiated and defined by genes involved in cytoskeleton rearrangement that explains their highly motile patrolling behavior in vivo. Additionally, we identify unique surface markers, CLEC4D, IL-13RA1 for classical, GFRA2, CLEC10A for intermediate and GPR44 for nonclassical. Our study hence defines the fundamental features of monocyte subsets necessary for future research on monocyte heterogeneity.

DESIGN
Three human monocyte subsets, the CD14++CD16- classical, the CD14++CD16+ intermediate and CD14+CD16+ nonclassical subsets were purified using fluorescence activated cell sorting from peripheral blood mononuclear cells. RNA was processed from the three monocyte subsets from 4 individual donors in duplicates, giving a total of 24 samples.

