TITLE
SYSTEMATIC TRANSCRIPTIONAL PROFILING OF THE LIVER, HEART, SKELETAL MUSCLE, AND ADIPOSE TISSUE IN INSULIN RESISTANT, DIET-INDUCED OBESE C57BL/6J MOUSE

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Following 20wk of either chow or high fat feeding, tissues were collected from C57BL/6J mice. Gene expression in four tissues that have been associated with obesity-related metabolic complications: white adipose tissue (WAT), skeletal muscle, the liver, and the heart were examined.  Data suggest that some tissues may be attempting to reduce the metabolic perturbations that occur in the early stages of obesity. Also, many identified genes were associated with a variety of disorders, thereby serving as potential links between obesity and related health risks.

DESIGN
After 3 wk of weaning, male C57BL/6J littermates were randomly separated into control (n=6) and treatment (n=6) groups for each tissue. After an acclimatization period of 1wk, animals were given free access to a chow diet (23% protein, 21% fat, and 55% carbohydrate) or a high fat (HF) diet (15% protein, 59% fat, and 26% carbohydrate) for 20wk. Following the feeding period, animals were fasted for 6h, anesthetized with pentobarbital, and weighed. Blood glucose was assessed in anesthetized mice. Non-esterified fatty acids and immunoreactive insulin was assayed with a double antibody method. Samples of WAT, the liver, gastrocnemius muscle and heart were obtained, frozen with liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80oC until subsequent use. Tissue samples were homogenized at short intervals of time and total RNA was isolated using cold TRIzol (Invitrogen, Ontario, Canada)  to prevent RNA degradation. Cdna was prepared to perform the microarrays. For every treatment sample and its corresponding control, two microarrays were performed in a dye-swap normalization experiment. Mouse M7K microarray chip from the Southern Alberta Microarray Facility (University of Calgary, Calgary, AB) were used (GEO Accession: Platform GPL3965).

PLATFORM
GPL3965 SAMF Mouse 7k

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

