TITLE
Gene expression in cardiac tissues from infants with idiopathic conotruncal defects

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is the most commonly seen type of conotruncal congenital heart defect. Treatment of these patients has evolved dramatically in the last few decades, yet a genetic explanation for the failure of cardiac development is lacking for the majority of children with TOF.  Our goal was to examine genome wide gene expression to characterize expression patterns in cardiovascular tissue (right ventricle, pulmonary valve and pulmonary artery) obtained at the time of reconstructive surgery from 19 children with tetralogy of Fallot.  We employed genome wide gene expression microarrays to characterize cardiovascular tissue (right ventricle, pulmonary valve and pulmonary artery) obtained at the time of reconstructive surgery from 19 children with tetralogy of Fallot (16 idiopathic and 3 with 22q11.2 deletions) and compared gene expression patterns to normally developing subjects. We detected a signal from approximately 26,000 probes (ranging from 35% to 49% of array probes in the three tissues), reflecting expression from about half of all genes.  More than 1000 genes had a 2-fold change in expression in the right ventricle (RV) of children with TOF compared to RV from matched control infants.  Most of these genes were involved in compensatory functions (e.g., hypertrophy, cardiac fibrosis and cardiac dilation).  However, two canonical pathways involved in spatial and temporal cell differentiation (WNT, p = 0.017 and Notch, p = 0.003) appeared to be generally suppressed.  The suppression of developmental networks may be a remnant of a broad malfunction of regulatory pathways leading to inaccurate boundary formation and improper structural development in the embryonic heart.  We suggest that small tissue specific genomic and/or epigenetic fluctuations could be cumulative, leading to regulatory network disruption and failure of proper cardiac development.

DESIGN
Analyzed RNA extracted from right ventricle of 16 idiopathic TOF patients and 5 controls. This submission represents the right ventricle component of the study.

PLATFORM
GPL11329 CodeLink Human Whole Genome Bioarray

CITATIONS
21208432

