TITLE
Identification of genes upregulated by MeTA-array in human pancreatic cancers

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Identification and characterization of epigenetically silenced genes is very important for cancer research. Particularly, information of hypermethylated genes provides clues to understand roles of epigenetics in tumorigeneses, and genes frequently methylated in a tumor-specific manner can be used as tumor markers. DNA methylation inhibitors such as 5-aza-cytidine or 5-aza-2’-deoxycytidine were widely used to search epigenetically silenced genes. However, these inhibitors frequently upregulate genes whose promoters remain unmethylated. We tried to improve the specificity and sensitivity in detecting such methylation-mediated silenced genes in cancer and successfully developed a new method termed “methyl-CpG targeted transcriptional activation (MeTA)” by using a transcriptional activating fragment with a methyl-CpG binding domain (MBD) that specifically recognizes and binds to methylated DNAs. Because MBD proteins in fact mediate transcriptional repression of tumor suppressor genes associated with promoter hypermethylation in cancer, MeTA is thought to be one of the ideal methods to search such genes. In the present study, we applied this method to three representative pancreatic cancer cell lines, AsPC-1, MIA PaCa-2, and PANC-1, with a normal pancreatic ductal epithelial cell line HPDE (as the control). All of these cell lines have already been analyzed their expression profiles by 5-aza-2’-deoxycytidine. We first analyzed the expression of five genes by RT-PCR with Southern hybridization, NEFH, NPTX2, SFRP1, TIMP3, and UCHL1; these genes are known to be methylated in at least any one of these cancer cell lines. Upregulation by “MeTA” was confirmed in all of these genes. Then we searched for upregulated-genes, by two-folds or more, in all the three cancer cell lines after MeTA; nineteen such upregulated genes were identified. Among these, sixteen genes except NEFH, HOXA9, and CLDN5 have not been reported previously using the conventional DNA methylation inhibitors. Methylation status of two genes, SLC32A1 and CSMD2, were further analyzed by methylation-specific PCR and found that SLC32A1 and CSMD2 were methylated in 100% (21/21) and 83% (15/18) pancreatic cancer cell lines analyzed, respectively. Our results suggest that “MeTA” is a highly efficient method to isolate methylation-mediated transcriptionally silenced genes in human pancreatic cancer and that this method can be applied to other types of human cancer.

DESIGN
Three representative pancreatic cancer cell lines, AsPC-1, MIA PaCa-2, and PANC-1, with a normal pancreatic ductal epithelial cell line HPDE (as the control) were transfected with pcDNA6/myc-His vector or pcDNA6-3xFLAG-NFkB (AD)-MBD and were harvested 48 h after transfection.

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
21723258

