TITLE
TNF time course study

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
TNF time course series of HelA tet off cells cultured in presence or absence of Dox TNF is a pro-inflammatory cytokine that controls expression of inflammatory genetic networks.  Although the Nuclear Factor-kB (NF-kB) pathway is crucial for mediating cellular TNF responses, the complete spectrum of NF-kB dependent genes is unknown.  In this study, we used a tetracycline-regulated cell line expressing an NF-kB inhibitor to systematically identify NF-kB dependent genes.  A microarray data set generated from a time course of TNF stimulation in the presence or absence of NF-kB signaling was analyzed. Methods: Cell culture, treatment and transfection-The human cervical epithelioid carcinoma cell line HeLa expressing tTA (HeLa Tet-Off) pBI-EGFP- IkBa Mut was constructed earlier (23).  HeLa Tet-Off were grown in medium containing 90 % Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM), 10 % heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), 4mM L-glutamine, 0.1 mM non-essential amino acids, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 100 mg/ml G418, 100 units /ml penicillin G sodium, and 100 mg/ml streptomycin sulfate in a humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2.   For TNF stimulation, freshly isolated cells were split into two cultures, one group maintained in Dox, the other without for 7 d, a time at which IkBa Mut expression was maximal.  Thereafter, recombinant human (rh) TNFa (25 ng/ml, final concentration) was added directly to the culture medium for indicated times prior to harvest. Oligonucleotide probe based microarray-Hu95Av2 GeneChip (Affymetrix Inc, Santa Clara, CA) containing 12,626 sequenced human genes were hybridized according to the manufacturer’s recommendations and washed using both non-stringent (1 M NaCl, 25 °C) and stringent (1 M NaCl, 50  °C) conditions prior to staining with phycoerythrin streptavidin (10 mg/ml final).  Arrays were scanned using a Gene Array Scanner (Hewlett Packard) and analyzed using the Gene Chip Analysis Suite 5 software (Affymetrix Inc).  For each gene, 16-20 probe pairs are immobilized as ~25-mer oligonucleotides that hybridize throughout the mRNA;  each probe pair is represented as a perfect match (PM) oligonucleotide and a mismatch (MM) oligonucleotide as hybridization control.  The the Absolute Call [e.g., the gene is detected (“present”) or not (“absent”)] and the Signal Intensity (measure of mRNA abundance) is determined. Four independent experiments were performed identically including control (0 h ), 1, 3 and 6 h TNF stimulation (25 ng/ml) in the presence or absence of Doxycyline (2 mg/ml) in growth medium. These are indicated as 180, 181, 220 and 266 series, and are considered replicates of each other. Keywords: time-course

PLATFORM
GPL8300 [HG_U95Av2] Affymetrix Human Genome U95 Version 2 Array

CITATIONS
15722553

