TITLE
Expression data from normal rat and steroid induced necrosis of femoral head rat

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
The steriod-induced necrosis of femoral head(SINFH) is a serious clinical problem and the underlying mechanism of this disease remains unknown. As its etiology and pathogenesis are not clear, there hasn’t been an effective treatment yet. In-depth studies on its pathogenesis will provide important information for the prevention and treatment of this devastated disease. Animal model researches are helpful to a better understanding of its etiology and pathogenesis, to early diagnosis and treatments and provide the basis for clinical treatment It has been proved that the occurrence of SINFH is related to gene itself and its polymorphism. These studies, in which only one or a few genes were investigated, could not provide a comprehensive understanding to the pathogenesis of SINFH. We used microarrays to compare the gene expression profile of SINFH rats with that of normal rats and identified gene expression changes between SINFH rats and normal rats.

DESIGN
Adult healthy male Wistar rats(body weight 200±10g) were randomly divided into control and experimental groups. All the rats were given injection of E. coli endotoxin at a dose of  20μg/kg body weight into abdominal cavity for two times with a 24 hour interval. 24 hours after the second administration of E. coli endotoxin, methylprednisolone 40mg/kg was administered into the left gluteus muscle of experimental group rats for three times with a 24 hour interval. Rats were then killed 6 weeks after steroid administration. In experiment, immediately after death the left femoral heads were isolated. Femoral heads were used for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays. We sought to obtain the gene expression profile of SINFH rats and that of normal rats in order to identified gene expression changes between SINFH rats and normal rats by comparing the gene expression profile of SINFH rats with that of normal rats. To that end, we have established the gene expression profiles of normal and SINFH disease of rat femoral head and found out differentially expressed genes.

PLATFORM
GPL1355 [Rat230_2] Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

