TITLE
Characterization of small interfering RNAs derived from the geminivirus/betasatellite complex using deep sequencing

ORGANISM
Tomato yellow leaf curl China virus

SUMMARY
Small RNA (sRNA)-guided RNA silencing is a critical antiviral defense mechanism employed by a variety of eukaryotic organisms. Although the induction of RNA silencing by bipartite and monopartite begomoviruses has been described in plants, the nature of begomovirus/betasatellite complexes remains undefined. We profiled Tomato yellow leaf curl China virus (TYLCCNV) and its associated betasatellite (TYLCCNB)-derived small RNAs (V-sRNAs and S-sRNAs) using Solexa-based deep sequencing to evaluate the role of betasatellites in V-sRNA modulation. Both sense and anti-sense V-sRNAs and S-sRNAs accumulated preferentially as 22 nucleotide species in infected Solanum lycopersicum and Nicotiana benthamiana plants, indicating that secondary siRNAs were triggered. High resolution mapping of V-sRNA and S-sRNA revealed heterogeneous distribution of V-sRNA and S-sRNA sequences across the TYLCCNV and TYLCCNB genomes. In TYLCCNV-infected S. lycopersicum or N. benthamiana and TYLCCNV and betaC1-mutant TYLCCNB co-infected N. benthamiana plants, the primary TYLCCNV targets were AV2 and the 5’ terminus of AV1. In TYLCCNV and betasatellite-infected plants, the number of V-sRNAs targeting this region decreased and the production of V-sRNAs increased corresponding to the overlapping regions of AC2 and AC3, as well as the 3’ terminal of AC1. betaC1 is the primary determinant mediating symptom induction and also the primary silencing target of the TYLCCNB genome even in its mutated form. In addition, the betasatellite affected the amount of V-sRNAs detected in S. lycopersicum and N. benthamiana plants.

DESIGN
characterization of Tomato yellow leaf curl China virus and Tomato yellow leaf curl China betasatellite-derived small interfering RNAs from five cDNA libraries of two plant species

PLATFORM
GPL11369 Illumina Genome Analyzer (Tomato yellow leaf curl China virus)

CITATIONS
21347388

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
