TITLE
High Fat Diet Reduces the Expression of Glutathione Peroxidase 3 in Mouse Prostate

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
High fat diets are known to be a risk factor for prostate cancer. In this study, we investigated the effect of high fat diet on mouse prostate gene expression.   C57BL/6J mice were fed either a control or high fat diet for 12 weeks. Microarray analyses were performed on mouse ventral prostate (VP) and dorsolateral prostate (DLP), followed by canonical pathway analysis and regulatory network identification. mRNA changes were confirmed by real time PCR.   Approximately 2,125, and 1,194 genes responded significantly to the high fat diet in VP, DLP, respectively. Pathways and networks related to oxidative stress, glutathione metabolism, NRF-mediated oxidative stress response and NF-kappaB were all differentially regulated by high fat diet. GPx3 mRNA levels were decreased by approximately 2-fold by high fat diet in all 3 prostate lobes. In human non-transformed prostate cells (PrSC, PrEC and BPH-1), cholesterol loading decreased GPx3 expression, and increased H2O2 levels of culture medium. Troglitazone increased GPx3 expression in 3 normal prostate cells, and decreased H2O2 levels. In addition, troglitazone attenuated cholesterol-induced H2O2 increase. Tissue from prostate cancer biopsies had decreased GPx3 mRNA and its level was inversely related to the Gleason score. High fat diet alters pathways related to many genes concerned with oxidative stress. GPx3, a gene identified by this analysis, was found to be down regulated by high fat diet and appears be decreased in human prostate cancers, suggesting that GPx3 may have a possible role in modulating carcinogenesis.

DESIGN
Control group:5 C57BL/6J mice (Taconic, Hudson, NY), 8-weeks of age, fed control diet ad libitum for 12 weeks; Experimental group: 5 C57BL/6J mice (Taconic, Hudson, NY), 8-weeks of age, fed ad libitum high fat diet for 12 weeks.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21374652

