TITLE
Differential Gene Expression in HDAC7-Deficient and Transgenic Thymocytes

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Abstract of publicaton: CD4/CD8 double-positive (DP) thymocytes express the transcriptional repressor Histone Deacetylase 7 (HDAC7), a class IIa HDAC that is exported from the cell nucleus after T cell receptor (TCR) engagement. Through signal-dependent nuclear export, class IIa HDACs such as HDAC7 mediate signal-dependent changes in gene expression that are important to developmental fate decisions in multiple tissues. We report that HDAC7 is exported from the cell nucleus during positive selection in thymocytes, and regulates genes mediating the coupling between TCR engagement and downstream events that determine cell survival. Thymocytes lacking HDAC7 are inefficiently positively selected due to a severely shortened lifespan and exhibit a truncated repertoire of TCR Jalpha segments. The expression of multiple important mediators and modulators of the response to TCR engagement is altered in HDAC7-deficient thymocytes, resulting in increased tonic MAP kinase activity that contributes to the observed loss of viability. Remarkably, the activity of Protein Kinase D, the kinase that mediates nuclear export of HDAC7 in response to TCR signaling, is also increased in HDAC7-deficient thymocytes, suggesting that HDAC7 nuclear export governs a self-sustaining auto-excitatory loop. These experiments add to the understanding of the life/death decision in thymic T cell development, define a novel function for class IIa HDACs, and point to a novel feed-forward mechanism whereby these molecules regulate their own state and mediate stable developmental transitions. Title of manuscript: Nuclear Export of Histone Deacetylase 7 During Thymic Selection Mediates Immune Self-tolerance.  abstract of manuscript: Histone Deacetylase 7 (HDAC7) is a TCR signal-dependent regulator of differentiation that is highly expressed in CD4/CD8 double-positive (DP) thymocytes. Here we examine the effect of blocking TCR-dependent nuclear export of HDAC7 during thymic selection, through expression of a signal-resistant mutant of HDAC7 (HDAC7-?P) in thymocytes. We find that HDAC7-?P Transgenic thymocytes exhibit a profound block in negative thymic selection, but can still undergo positive selection, resulting in the escape of autoreactive T cells into the periphery. Gene expression profiling reveals a comprehensive suppression of the negative selection-associated gene expression program in DP thymocytes, associated with a defect in the activation of MAP kinase pathways by TCR signals. The consequence of this block in vivo is a lethal autoimmune syndrome involving the exocrine pancreas and other abdominal organs. These experiments establish a novel molecular model of autoimmunity and cast new light on the relationship between thymic selection and immune self-tolerance. Goal of Microarray experiment: We did these experiments to determine how alteration of the function of HDAC7, a site-specific and signal-dependent repressor of transcription, changes gene expression in CD4/CD8 DP thymocytes.

DESIGN
Three biological replicate samples were prepared for each non-wild type mouse strain (Samples 7-18). Six biological replicates were prepared for the wild type strain (Samples 1-6). Total RNA was prepared from isolated CD4/CD8 Double-positive thymocytes and labeled with the Affymetrix Whole-Transcript labeling protocol. Labeled probes were hybridized to one Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0ST array each. Data from .cel files were normalized using RMA, in normalization groups representing each of the binary comparisons made. These binary comparisons between sample groups represent gene expression changes due to loss of HDAC7 (samples 1-3 vs. 7-9), transgenic expression of an HDAC7-VP16 fusion protein (samples 4-6 vs. 10-12), positive thymic selection (samples 1-6 vs. samples 11-15), and negative thymic selection (Samples 11-15 vs. samples 16-18).

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
21398603

