TITLE
Gene expression of immortalized cystic fibrosis and non-cystic fibrosis airway epithelial cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Our laboratory has held a long interest in the glycosylation changes seen on the surface of airway epithelia of patients with the disease cystic fibrosis (CF). Experiments from our laboratory have detailed a CF glycosylation phenotype of increased Fuca1,3/4 and decreased Fuca1,2 and sialic acid on the surfaces of immortalized and primary CF cells compared to non-CF cells. Further, we have shown that gene transfer and subsequent expression of a wild type CF plasmid in CF airway cells results in correction or reversal of this glycosylation phenotype. We hypothesize that the changes in glycosylation seen in CF cells are key in the pathophysiology of the cystic fibrosis airway disease. For example, it has been shown that Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a bacterium that has a predilection for colonizing CF airways, adheres to asialylated glycolipids and glycoconjugates with terminal Fuca1,3/4. One focus of our laboratory is to elucidate the etiology of the glycosylation changes seen in CF cells and the mechanism by which these changes are reversed by wild type CFTR gene transfer.

DESIGN
We propose to study the gene expression of immortalized and primary CF and non-CF airway epithelial cells: 1. CF/T43 vs. BEAS-2B cells. These are two widely used immortalized airway cell lines that we have used extensively in the past.  2. C38 cells;  C38 cells are IB3 cells expressing wtCFTR. The experimental focus is to elucidate the etiology of the glycosylation changes seen in Cystic Fibrosis (CF) cells and the mechanism by which these changes are reversed by wild type CFTR gene transfer. To do so, the gene expression of immortalized and primary CF and non-CF airway epithelial cells were compared and studied. Cell lines used were CF/T43 and BEAS-2B, both widely used immortalized airway cell lines. Other cell lines studied included C38 cell lines (clonal derivatives of IB3 cells expressing wtCFTR).

PLATFORM
GPL11093 [scrGLYCO-v1F] Custom Affymetrix Glyco v1 GeneChip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

