TITLE
Targets of Ephrin-A signaling in epidermal keratinocytes

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Both ephrins and their receptors are membrane bound, restricting their interactions to the sites of direct cell-to-cell interfaces. They are widely expressed, often co-expressed and regulate developmental processes, cell adhesion, motility, survival, proliferation, and differentiation. Both tumor suppressor and oncogene activities are ascribed to EFNs and Ephs in various contexts. A major conundrum regarding the EFN/Eph system concerns their large number and functional redundancy, given the promiscuous cross-activation of ligands and receptors and the overlapping intracellular signaling pathways. To address this issue, we treated human epidermal keratinocytes with 5 EFNAs individually and defined the transcriptional responses in the cells. We found that a large set of genes is coregulated by all EFNAs. However, while the responses to EFNA3, EFNA 4 and EFNA 5 are identical, the responses to EFNA1 and EFNA2 are characteristic and distinctive. All EFNAs induce epidermal differentiation markers and suppress cell adhesion genes, especially integrins. Ontological analysis shows that all EFNAs induce cornification and keratin genes, while suppressing wound-healing associated, signaling, receptor and ECM associated genes. Transcriptional targets of AP1 are selectively suppressed by EFNAs. EFNA1 and EFNA2, but not the EFNA3, EFNA4, EFNA5 cluster, regulate the members of the ubiquitin-associated proteolysis genes. EFNA1 specifically induces collagen production. Our results demonstrate that the EFN-Eph interactions in the epidermis, while promiscuous, are not redundant but specific. This suggests that different members of the EFN/Eph system have specific, clearly demarcated functions.

DESIGN
Human epidermal keratinocytes are treated with 25 ng/ml EFNA1; EFNA2; EFNA3; EFNA4 or EFNA5 (all as Fc conjugates) for 24h.

PLATFORM
GPL571 [HG-U133A_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21193391

