TITLE
Multi-omics approach to study the growth efficiency and amino acid metabolism in Lactococcus lactis at various specific growth rates

ORGANISM
Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis Il1403

SUMMARY
Background  Lactococcus lactis is recognised as a safe (GRAS) microorganism and has hence gained interest in numerous biotechnological approaches. As it is fastidious for several amino acids, optimization of processes which involve this organism requires a thorough understanding of its metabolic regulations during multisubstrate growth.    Results  Using glucose limited continuous cultivations, specific growth rate dependent metabolism of L. Lactis including utilization of amino acids was studied based on extracellular metabolome, global transcriptome and proteome analysis. A new growth medium was designed with reduced amino acid concentrations to increase precision of measurements of consumption of amino acids. Consumption patterns were calculated for all 20 amino acids and measured carbon balance showed good fit of the data at all growth rates studied. It was observed that metabolism of L. lactis became more efficient with rising specific growth rate in the range 0.10 – 0.60 h-1, indicated by 30% increase in biomass yield based on glucose consumption, 50% increase in efficiency of nitrogen use for biomass synthesis, and 40% reduction in energy spilling. The latter was realized by decrease in the overall product formation and higher efficiency of incorporation of amino acids into biomass. L. lactis global transcriptome and proteome profiles showed good correlation supporting the general idea of transcription level control of bacterial metabolism, but the data indicated that substrate transport systems together with lower part of glycolysis in L. lactis were presumably under allosteric control.     Conclusions   The current study demonstrates advantages of the usage of strictly controlled continuous cultivation methods combined with multi-omics approach for quantitative understanding of amino acid and energy metabolism of Lactococcus lactis which is a valuable new knowledge for development of balanced growth media, gene manipulations for desired product formation etc. Moreover, collected dataset is an excellent input for developing metabolic models.

DESIGN
For microarray analysis, steady state chemostat culture of L. lactis IL1403 was used as reference (μ = 0.10 1/h). Subsequent quasi steady state points from A-stat experiment at specific growth rates 0.52 ± 0.03; 0.42 ± 0.02; 0.29 ± 0.01 1/h in biological duplicates and 0.17 1/h were compared to the reference sample.

PLATFORM
GPL11413 Agilent/CCFFT Lactococcus lactis IL1403 8x15k v1.0 (gene name version)

CITATIONS
21349178

