TITLE
Human and mouse gene expression data from LPS-exposed mouse lungs treated with human MSCs

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens ; Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Multipotent stromal cells (MSCs) are currently in clinical trials for a number of inflammatory diseases. Recent studies have demonstrated the ability of MSCs to attenuate inflammation in rodent models of acute lung injury (ALI) suggesting that MSCs may also be beneficial in treating ALI. To better understand how human MSCs (hMSCs) may act in ALI, the lungs of immunocompetent mice were exposed to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and 4 hr later bone marrow derived hMSCS were delivered by oropharyngeal aspiration (OA). Administration of hMSCs significantly reduced the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, neutrophil counts and total protein in bronchoalveolar lavage. There was a concomitant reduction in pulmonary edema as indicated by a decrease in lung wet/dry weight ratio. The anti-inflammatory effects of hMSCs were not dependent on localization to the lung, as intraperitoneal administration of hMSCs also attenuated LPS-induced inflammation in the lung. Microarray analysis revealed significant induction of TNF-α-induced protein 6 (TSG-6) expression by hMSCs 12 hr after OA delivery to LPS-exposed lungs. Knockdown of TSG-6 expression in hMSCs by RNA interference abrogated most of their anti-inflammatory effects. In addition, intra-pulmonary delivery of recombinant human TSG-6 reduced LPS-induced inflammation in the lung. These results show that hMSCs recapitulate the observed beneficial effects of rodent MSCs in animal models of ALI and suggest that the anti-inflammatory properties of hMSCs in the lung are explained, at least in part, by activation of hMSCs to secrete TSG-6.

DESIGN
Eight- to 10-week-old female BALB/C mice were treated with either 1 mg/kg lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in 100 μl PBS or an equal volume of PBS, as vehicle control, by oropharyngeal aspiration (OA). Four hours after LPS exposure, 250,000 human multipotent stromal cells in 100 μl of PBS were given by OA and 30 min later a second dose of equal concentration was administered, for a total of 500,000 hMSC. As a control, 200 μl PBS was delivered as described above. After 12 h, total RNA was isolated from (A) lungs of LPS-exposed mice treated with either hMSCs (LPS+MSC) or PBS (LPS+PBS), and (B) lungs of PBS-exposed mice treated with hMSCs (PBS+MSC). To obtain additional controls, hMSCs were mixed in vitro with either LPS- (LPS+MSC in vitro mix) or PBS-exposed (PBS+MSC in vitro mix) mouse lungs just before RNA isolation. RNA samples containing mouse and human RNA were first analyzed for amount of human RNA based on human GAPDH signal from real-time RT PCR. Samples with similar human RNA content were used for both mouse and human microarrays

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

