TITLE
Increased Cell Surface Fas Expression is Necessary to Sensitize Lung Fibroblasts to Fas Ligation-Induced Apoptosis: Implications for Fibroblast Accumulation in Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is associated with the accumulation of collagen-secreting fibroblasts and myofibroblasts in the lung parenchyma. Many mechanisms contribute to their accumulation, including resistance to apoptosis. In previous work, we showed that exposure to the pro-inflammatory cytokines, TNF-α and IFN-γ reverses fibroblast resistance to apoptosis. The goal of this study was to investigate the underlying mechanism. Based on an initial interrogation of the transcriptomes of unstimulated and TNF-α and IFN-γ-stimulated primary lung fibroblasts and the lung fibroblast cell line, MRC5, we show here that among Fas-signaling pathway molecules, Fas expression was increased ~6-fold in an NF-κB and p38mapk-dependent fashion.  Prevention of the increase in Fas expression using Fas siRNAs blocked the ability of TNF-α and IFN-γ to sensitize fibroblasts to Fas ligation induced-apoptosis; while enforced adenovirus-mediated Fas overexpression was sufficient to overcome basal resistance to Fas-induced apoptosis. Examination of lung tissues from IPF patients revealed low to absent staining of Fas in fibroblastic cells of fibroblast foci. Collectively, these findings suggest that increased expression of Fas is necessary and sufficient to overcome the resistance of lung fibroblasts to Fas-induced apoptosis. They also suggest that approaches aimed at increasing Fas expression by lung fibroblasts and myofibroblasts may be therapeutically relevant.

DESIGN
To investigate the mechanism by which TNF-α and IFN-γ reprogram fibroblasts from resistance to sensitivity to Fas-ligation-induce apoptosis, we exposed human primary lung fibroblasts from an IPF patient (FS087) and non-disease control subject (N78) and the human fetal lung fibroblast cell lung (MRC-5) to TNF-α (10 ng/ml) and IFN-γ (50 U/ml) for 36 hr and analyzed changes in their transcriptomes using Affymetrix microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21632719

