TITLE
Molecular and phenotypic characterization of a mouse model of oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy reveals severe muscular atrophy restricted to fast glycolytic fibres

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is an adult-onset disorder characterized by ptosis, dysphagia and proximal limb weakness. Autosomal-dominant OPMD is caused by a short (GCG)8–13 expansions within the first exon of the poly(A)-binding protein nuclear 1 gene (PABPN1), leading to an expanded polyalanine tract in the mutated protein. Expanded PABPN1 forms insoluble aggregates in the nuclei of skeletal muscle fibres. In order to gain insight into the different physiological processes affected in OPMD muscles, we have used a transgenic mouse model of OPMD (A17.1) and performed transcriptomic studies combined with a detailed phenotypic characterization of this model at three time points. The transcriptomic analysis revealed a massive gene deregulation in the A17.1 mice, among which we identified a significant deregulation of pathways associated with muscle atrophy. Using a mathematical model for progression, we have identified that one-third of the progressive genes were also associated with muscle atrophy. Functional and histological analysis of the skeletal muscle of this mouse model confirmed a severe and progressive muscular atrophy associated with a reduction in muscle strength. Moreover, muscle atrophy in the A17.1 mice was restricted to fast glycolytic fibres, containing a large number of intranuclear inclusions (INIs). The soleus muscle and, in particular, oxidative fibres were spared, even though they contained INIs albeit to a lesser degree. These results demonstrate a fibre-type specificity of muscle atrophy in this OPMD model. This study improves our understanding of the biological pathways modified in OPMD to identify potential biomarkers and new therapeutic targets.

DESIGN
A17.1 transgenic mice have previously been described. Male A17.1 mice and WT controls were generated by crossing the heterozygous carrier strain A17.1 obtained from Rubinsztein's group with the FvB background mice. The mice were genotyped by PCR 3–4 weeks after birth. Wild type FvB and A17.1 mice were housed in minimal disease facilities (Royal Holloway, University of London) with food and water ad libitum. Total RNA was extracted from skeletal muscles using RNA Bee (Amsbio) according to the manufacturer's instructions. RNA integration number (RIN) was determined with RNA 6000 Nano (Agilent Technologies). RNA with RIN > 7 were used for subsequent steps. RNA labelling was performed with the Illumina® TotalPrep RNA Amplification kit (Ambion) according to the manufacturer's protocol, and subsequently was hybridized to Illumina Mouse v1.1 Bead arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL6481 Illumina mouse-6 v1.1 expression beadchip [Array_Address_Id version]

CITATIONS
20207626

