TITLE
Role of the prophages in the Staphylococcus aureus pathogenesis

ORGANISM
Staphylococcus aureus

SUMMARY
Staphylococcus aureus is a Gram-positive human pathogen causing a variety of human diseases in both hospital and community settings. This bacterium is so closely associated with prophages that it is rare to find S. aureus isolates without prophages. Two phages are known to be important for staphylococcal virulence: the beta-hemolysin (hlb) converting phage and the Panton-Valentine Leukocidin (PVL) converting phage. The hlb-converting phage is found in more than 90% of clinical isolates of S. aureus. This phage produces exotoxins and immune modulatory molecules, which inhibit human innate immune responses. The PVL-converting phage produces the two-component exotoxin PVL, which can kill human leucocytes. This phage is wide-spread among community-associated methicillin resistant S. aureus (CA-MRSA).  It also shows strong association with soft tissue infections and necrotizing pneumonia. Several lines of evidence suggest that staphylococcal prophages increase bacterial virulence not only by providing virulence factors but also by altering bacterial gene expression: 1) Transposon insertion into prophage regulatory genes, but not into the genes of virulence factors, reduced S. aureus killing of Caenorhabditis elegans.; 2) Although the toxins and immune modulatory molecules encoded by the hlb- converting phages do not function in the murine system, deletion of ϕNM3, the hlb-converting phage in S. aureus Newman,  reduced staphylococcal virulence in the murine abscess formation model. 3) In a preliminary microarray experiment, prophages in S. aureus Newman altered the expression of more than 300 genes.  In this research proposal, using microarray and high-throughput quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) technologies, we will identify the effects of the two important staphylococcal phages on the gene expression of S. aureus in both in vitro and in vivo conditions. This project is intended to be completed within one year. All the data – microarray, qRT-PCR and all the primer sequences- will be made available to public 6 month after completion. Data from this project will help us to understand the role of prophages in the S. aureus pathogenesis and can lead to development of a strategy to interfere with the pathogenesis process.

DESIGN
Following strains were grown in TSA broth: Staphylococcus aureus USA300 (reference) Staphylococcus aureus USA300 with deletion of ϕSa2usa (Query) Staphylococcus aureus USA300 with deletion of ϕSa3usa (Query) Staphylococcus aureus USA300 Prophage-free mutant (Query) Staphylococcus aureus USA300 Prophage-free mutant lysogenized with ϕSa2mw (Query) Staphylococcus aureus USA300 Prophage-free mutant lysogenized with ϕSa3usa (Query) strain: Staphylococcus aureus USA300 Prophage-free mutant lysogenized with both ϕSa2mw and ϕSa3usa (Query) RNA samples were harvested at early log, midlog and stationary phase.Samples were hybridized on aminosilane coated slides with 70-mer oligos.

PLATFORM
GPL8753 JCVI PFGRC Staphylococcus aureus 22K v7 array designed primarily based on strain USA300

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

