TITLE
Folsomia candida exposed to different 2-phenylethyl isothiocyanate concentrations in soil

ORGANISM
Folsomia candida

SUMMARY
Natural toxins, such as isothiocyanate (ITC), are harmful secondary metabolites produced by plants. Many natural toxins occur in commercial crops, yet their possible negative repercussions on especially non-target soil organisms are largely unknown. This study examined molecular effects of 2-phenylethyl ITC on the soil arthropod species: Folsomia candida. Complementing ecotoxicological experiments with gene expression profiling allows the study of the underlying modes of action of toxins. For this the standardized ISO guideline for ecotoxicological experiments and a microarray for F. candida (GPL7150) were used. Toxic effects on reproduction were shown for F. candida, with EC50 values of around 11.5 nmol/g soil, illustrating the toxic character of this compound. A total of 130 genes were significantly differentially expressed between C and AC. The compounds were spiked in with acetone and due to the substantial difference between the two controls, only AC was chosen for further contrast analysis, comparing AC to EC10 and EC50 gene expressions. At EC10 level, 75 genes and at the EC50 level 107 genes were differentially expressed compared to AC. Approximately 36% of all significant genes could be annotated using Blast2GO. Gene expression profiles revealed the importance of lipid metabolism at low exposure concentrations (EC10), which is associated with the lipophilic nature of 2-phenylethyl ITC. At higher dosages (EC50) a wider array of genes was over-expressed, which included genes related to stress and sugar metabolism.   Our study provides new insights in the molecular mode of action of a natural toxin soil animals. This study is the first step towards an understanding of these potential risks by studying the effects of a natural toxin at a life-history trait and molecular level.

DESIGN
Four-exposure experiment; Control vs. Acetone control vs.EC10 vs.EC50 exposed animals. Biological replicates: 4 replicates for each exposure.

