TITLE
Global transcriptome profiling after exposure to solute, matric, and sand desiccation stress in S. wittichii RW1

ORGANISM
Sphingomonas wittichii RW1

SUMMARY
Spingomonas wittichii strain RW1 can completely oxidize dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans, which are persistent contaminants of soils and sediments. For successful application in soil bioremediation systems, strain RW1 must cope with fluctuations in water availability, or water potential. The objectives of this study were to characterize how strain RW1 responses to changes in different components of the total water potential (solute and matric potential) and to then connect these responses to more realistic scenarios of soil desiccation. To accomplish this task, transcriptome profiling was used to investigate the effects of decreasing the solute potential with sodium chloride (solute stress), decreasing the matric potential with high-molecular weight polyethylene glycol (matric stress), or inoculating cells directly into unsaturated sand (sand desiccation stress). Transcriptome profiling revealed a general response to solute, matric, and sand desiccation stress that involved synthesizing trehalose and modifying the composition of exopolysaccarides. Transcriptome profiling also revealed responses that were unique to each stress. Only solute and matric stress triggered the down-regulation of flagella genes. Only solute and sand desiccation stress triggered the up-regulation of two RNA polymerase ECF-type sigma factors along with several membrane proteins, mechanosensitive channels, and solute transporters. Finally, only matric stress triggered the up-regulation of the RNA polymerase sigma-32 factor along with several molecular chaperones. Together, this study revealed a general response to solute, matric and sand desiccation stress but also unique responses to only a subset of these stresses, suggesting that each stress affects strain RW1 in a fundamentally different way.

DESIGN
Comparative transcriptome profiling was performed to assess the effects of acute (30 min) solute and matric stress (3 samples for acute solute stress, 3 samples for acute matric stress, 3 controls), the effects of chronic (24 hours) solute and matric stress (3 samples for chronic solute stress, 3 samples for chronic matric stress, 3 controls), and the effects of sand desiccation stress (4 samples for sand desiccation treatment, 3 controls).

PLATFORM
GPL11581 Agilent-021656 Sphingomonas wittichii RW1 [Feature Name version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

