TITLE
Expression Data From Dietary Restriction, p53 Knockdown and sir2 Overexpression Mutants

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Expression data from four different lifespan-extending conditions: dietary restriction in two different genetic backgrounds (canton-s and a yw, w1118 combination), sir2 overexpression and p53 knockdown (+/-). Comparison of significantly over and under-expressed genes reveals a signature for dietary restriction and lifespan extension. Abstract A major challenge in translating the positive effects of dietary restriction (DR) for the improvement of human health is the development of therapeutic mimics. One approach to finding DR mimics is based upon identification of the proximal effectors of DR life span extension. Whole genome profiling of DR in Drosophila shows a large number of changes in gene expression, making it difficult to establish which changes are involved in life span determination as opposed to other unrelated physiological changes. We used comparative whole genome expression profiling to discover genes whose change in expression is shared between DR and two molecular genetic life span extending interventions related to DR, increased dSir2 and decreased Dmp53 activity. We find twenty-one genes shared among the three related life span extending interventions. One of these genes, takeout, thought to be involved in circadian rhythms, feeding behavior and juvenile hormone binding is also increased in four other life span extending conditions: Rpd3, Indy, chico and methuselah. We demonstrate takeout is involved in longevity determination by specifically increasing adult takeout expression and extending life span. These studies demonstrate the power of comparative whole genome transcriptional profiling for identifying specific downstream elements of the DR life span extending pathway.

DESIGN
42 samples were used in the analysis. Sir2 overexpression flies and the yw, w1118 background DR flies had the same control. Flies were collected at ages 10 and 40 days. Tissue is whole body females.

PLATFORM
GPL1322 [Drosophila_2] Affymetrix Drosophila Genome 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
20519778

