TITLE
Consequences of conceptus exposure to colony stimulating factor 2 on survival, elongation, interferon-{tau} secretion and gene expression

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
Exposure of bovine conceptuses to colony stimulating factor 2 (CSF2) from Day 5 to 7 of development can increase the percent of transferred conceptuses that develop to term. The purpose of this experiment was to understand the mechanism by which CSF2 increases embryonic and fetal survival. Conceptuses were produced in vitro in the presence or absence of 10 ng/ml CSF2 from Day 5 to 7 after insemination, transferred into cows, and flushed from the uterus at Day 15 of pregnancy. There was a tendency (P=0.07) for the proportion of cows with a recovered conceptus to be greater for those receiving a CSF2 treated conceptus (35% for control vs. 66% for CSF2).  Antiviral activity in uterine flushings, a measure of the amount of interferon-{tau} (IFNT2) secreted by the conceptus, tended to be greater for cows receiving CSF2-treated conceptuses than for cows receiving control conceptuses. This difference approached significance when only cows with detectable antiviral activity were considered (P=0.07).  In addition, CSF2 increased mRNA for IFNT2 (P=0.06) and keratin 18 (P < 0.05) in extraembryonic membranes.  Among a subset of filamentous conceptuses that were analyzed by microarray hybridization, there was no effect of CSF2 on gene expression in the embryonic disc or extraembryonic membranes.  Results suggest that the increase in calving rate caused by CSF2 treatment involves, in part, more extensive development of extraembryonic membranes and capacity of the conceptus to secrete IFNT2 at Day 15 of pregnancy.

DESIGN
Experimental conditions: CSF2 treated vs. CSF2 nontreated bovine in vitro produced preimplantation embryos were tranfered to a receptor cow and recovered at Day 15 of embryo development. The embryonic disc (ED) and the trophectoderm (Tr) were used for the expression analysis separately.  Biological replicates: CSF2 treated vs. nontreated bovine preimplantation embryos were used in a dye switch two-color microarray experimental design.

