TITLE
Gene expression profile of H1 human embryonic stem cells, IMR90 lung fibroblasts, calcium induced keratinocytes, and primary hepatocytes

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In humans, there are eleven subtypes of linker histones that exhibit cell- and tissue-specific expression. Linker histone H1 proteins bind to both the core histones and linker DNA of chromatin fibers; and not only participate in control of gene activity but also serve to stabilize higher order chromatin structure. To determine the potential roles of linker histones in differentiation, we examined the global distribution of linker histone subtype H1.5 in human IMR90 fibroblasts and H1 embryonic stem cells (hESCs). Surprisingly, H1.5 binds to and represses a large fraction of gene family clusters in fully differentiated cell types representing all three embryonic germ layers. Little or no H1.5 enrichment at gene family clusters was detected in undifferentiated hESCs or partially differentiated somatic cells. We also found that SIRT1 histone deacetylase and H3K9me2, a repressive histone modification, are also enriched at gene family cluster in IMR90 cells, likely generating a stably repressive chromatin domain. To find out the mechanism of H1.5 targeting, H1.5 or SIRT1 was depleted in IMR90 cells by siRNA, and the binding patterns of SIRT1 and H1.5 were examined. In H1.5 knockdown cells, SIRT1 binding pattern was changed dramatically, and this changed pattern highly correlates to SIRT1 distribution in hESC. However, depletion of SIRT1 could not change the global binding pattern of H1.5. Depletion of H1.5 or SIRT1 leads to up-regulation of ~50% gene family clusters. However, the sets of gene family clusters that are affected by these two factors are different, suggesting H1.5 and SIRT1 may regulate gene transcription via different pathways.

DESIGN
One-color array. Two replicates for each sample.

PLATFORM
GPL4133 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

