TITLE
Expression data from epidermal stem cells isolated from dorsal skin of P19 Per1-Venus mice and Bmal1 epidermal knockout mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Epidermal stem cells ensure that skin homeostasis is maintained. In murine skin, epidermal stem cells cluster at specific niches where, under steady-state conditions, they undergo cycles of dormancy and activation1. When cellular replenishment is required, epidermal stem cells egress from the niche and proliferate for a limited number of times to subsequently feed into the differentiated compartment1-3. However, only a subset of stem cells becomes active during each round of morphogenesis, suggesting that stem cells coexist in heterogeneous responsive states within the same niche. Using a circadian clock fluorescent reporter mouse model, we show that the dormant epidermal stem cell niche contains two coexisting populations of stem cells at opposite phases of the clock, which are differentially predisposed to respond to homeostatic cues. In dormant niches, the core molecular clock protein Bmal1 transcriptionally modulates the expression of stem cell regulatory genes, including modulators of Wnt and TGFb, to create two coexisting stem cell populations, one predisposed, and the other less prone, to activation. Unbalancing this equilibrium of epidermal stem cells, through conditional epidermal deletion of Bmal1, resulted in a long-term progressive accumulation of non-responsive stem cells, premature impairment of tissue self-renewal, and a significant reduction in the development of squamous cell carcinomas. Our results indicate that the molecular clock machinery fine-tunes the spatiotemporal behavior of epidermal stem cells within their niche, and that perturbation of this mechanism affects tissue homeostasis and the predisposition to neoplastic transformation. The goals of this study was to compare the transcriptome of epidermal stem cells according to their circadian rhythm phase. We isolated epidermal stem cells (bulge cells; alpha6bright/CD34+ population) from 19 days old Per1-Venus mice and separated them according to Venusbright (clock positive) and Venus dim (clock negative). The goals of this study was to compare the transcriptome of epidermal stem cells in which their circadian rhythm machinery has been perturbed by deleting the gene that encodes for Bmal1. We compared the transcriptomes of basal interfollicular epidermis cells (alpha6 integrin bright/CD34- cells) from the dorsal skin of 1 year old BmalKO mice and their respective control littermates. Each array corresponds to purified cells from approximately 5 mice.

DESIGN
We profiled three samples of Venus bright and three of Venus dim epidermal stem cells. Each sample consisted of epidermal stem cells isolated from aproximately 20 mice (in order to obtain enough number of cells to perform high quality arrays). We profiled three WT samples and 3 KO samples. Each sample corresponds to basal interfollicular epidermis cells purified from 5 mice.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
22080954

