TITLE
Mouse embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells can form definitive endoderm despite differences in imprinted genes

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The directed differentiation of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) and embryonic stem (ES) cells into definitive endoderm (DE) would allow the derivation of otherwise inaccessible progenitors for endodermal tissues. However, a global comparison of the relative equivalency of DE derived from iPS and ES populations has not been performed. Recent reports of molecular differences between iPS and ES cells have raised uncertainty as to whether iPS cells could generate autologous endodermal lineages in vitro. Here, we have shown that both mouse iPS and parental ES cells exhibited highly similar in vitro capacity to undergo directed differentiation into DE progenitors. With few exceptions, both cell types displayed similar surges in gene expression of specific master transcriptional regulators and global transcriptomes that define the developmental milestones of DE differentiation. Microarray analysis showed considerable overlap between the genetic programs of DE derived from ES/iPS cells in vitro and authentic DE from mouse embryos in vivo. Intriguingly, iPS cells exhibited aberrant silencing of imprinted genes known to participate in endoderm differentiation, yet retained a robust ability to differentiate into DE. Our results show that, despite some molecular differences, iPS cells can be efficiently differentiated into DE precursors, reinforcing their potential for development of cell-based therapies for diseased endodermal-derived tissues.

DESIGN
Comparison of mouse ES cells, mouse iPS cells, and E8.25 Mouse embryos; in the undifferentiated state and definitive endoderm differentiated state. ckit+/Sox2dim =definitive endoderm (day 5 of differentiation in vitro); Sox2bright =undifferentiated ES or iPS cells (day 0 of differentiation); ENDM1+/Epcam+/SSlo=foregut endoderm sorted from mouse E8.25 embryos; Epcam+/ENDM1 negative =sorted comparison population from mouse E8.25 embryos.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
21537085

