TITLE
Perturbation of the Akt/Gsk3-beta signaling pathway is common to Drosophila expressing expanded untranslated CAG, CUG and AUUCU repeat RNAs

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Recent evidence supports a role for RNA as a common pathogenic agent in both the  “polyglutamine” and “untranslated” dominant expanded repeat disorders. One feature of all  repeat sequences currently associated with disease is their predicted ability to form a hairpin  secondary structure at the RNA level. In order to investigate mechanisms by which hairpin forming  repeat RNAs could induce neurodegeneration, we have looked for alterations in gene  transcripts as hallmarks of the cellular response to toxic hairpin repeat RNAs. Three disease associated  repeat sequences - CAG, CUG and AUUCU - were specifically expressed in the  neurons of Drosophila and resultant common, early, transcriptional changes assessed by  microarray analyses. Transcripts that encode several components of the Akt/Gsk3-β signalling  pathway were altered as a consequence of expression of these repeat RNAs, indicating that  this pathway is a component of the neuronal response to these pathogenic RNAs and may  represent an important common therapeutic target in this class of diseases.

DESIGN
The heads from newly eclosed Male Drosophila were used for RNA extraction and profiling on Affymetrix Drosophile Genome 2.0 microarrays. Twenty samples were analysed, representing control and experimental lines. Two independently derived control lines were used in each exeriment, totaling 4 samples. The tri-nucleotide repeats (CAG, CUG, CAA) were represented by three independently derived two transgene insertion lines each in one experiment and two independent four transgene insertion lines each in a second experiment, totaling 15 samples. A single four transgene insertion line was analysed for AUUCU. Candidates were selected from the pool of transcripts which showed a ‘present’ call in either all independent lines for a particular repeat sequence, or in all samples for the elav- GAL4/+ control in that experiment. Where possible, T-tests were performed on raw values to determine samples that showed a significant difference with a P-value < 0.05.

