TITLE
Migrating Schistosoma japonicum schistosomula induce type-2 inflammation in the murine lung

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Migrating schistosomula are an important stage of the schistosome lifecycle and represent a key target for elimination of infection by natural and vaccine induced host immune responses. To gain a better understanding of how these parasites initiate a primary host immune response we have characterised the host lung response to migrating Schistosoma japonicum schistosomula using a combination of histochemistry, microarrays and quantitative cytokine analysis. Our data suggest that, during a S. japonicum infection, actively migrating schistosomula induce a Type-2 cytokine response in the lung that may support the subsequent development of a CD4+ T helper 2 (Th2) response against egg antigens. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that schistosomula and schistosome eggs are known to express important Th2-inducing antigens such as omega-1, peroxiredoxin, kappa-5 and IPSE/alpha1. The host lung response to migrating schistosomula was associated with increased numbers of macrophages and expression of markers for alternatively activated macrophages (AAMφ) in the lung. Activation of AAMφ in the lung and at the systemic level could lead to the modulation of the host immune response to favour parasite survival. Induction of these cells could also contribute to diminished inflammatory responses to, for example, allergy and asthma that are known to be associated with helminth infections. These data enhance our understanding of the mechanisms whereby schistosomes may evade the immune response and the mechanisms by which schistosome infection can help influence the host response following exposure to allergenic stimuli.

DESIGN
The gene expression profile of the murine lung was examined at 3 days weeks post infection with 500 Schistosoma japonicum cercariae in comparison to that of uninfected controls. Microarray analysis was performed on cRNA synthesised from total RNA derived from the lungs of 3 individual mice per group.

PLATFORM
GPL6887 Illumina MouseWG-6 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
21917316

