TITLE
Canary Ovarian Cell Line Gene Expression

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
All cell lines were cultured according to the specifications outlined by ATCC. Cell lines were grown to 80% confluence, then serum-deprived in 0.5% FBS for 24 hours before harvesting. Cells were washed twice with Hank's Balanced Salt Solution (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California) and drained. 1 mL of SDS extraction buffer (0.1M NaCl, 20 mM Trizma base, 25 mM EDTA, 0.5% w/v SDS) was added directly to the plate to lyse the cells. Cellular lysate was scraped off the plates, pipetted into a cryovial, and stored at 80C until DNA extraction. Lysates were treated with 200 ug/ml ProteinaseK at 50C overnight. DNA was precipitated with one volume of Isopropanol and dissolved in TE4 buffer.  Cell lines were lysed in Phenol followed by a Phenol/Chloroform extraction. The aqueous layer was added to 70% ethanol and further purified by loading the RNA/Ethanol mix into an RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen) column. Purification was continued and finalized as described in the RNeasy kit (Qiagen) Manual.  We measured transcript levels in the 27 primary ovarian tumors and 15 cell lines using the HEEBO [16] oligonucleotide microarrays, containing 44,544 70-mer probes and printed at the Stanford Functional Genomics Facility. Detailed information on the HEEBO arrays is available at the Stanford Functional Genomics Facility website. Experimental methods.  Microarray experiments were performed as described at the Brown lab website. Briefly, 500 ug of total RNA from each of the ovarian tumors were amplified using Amino Allyl Message Amp II aRNA Kit (Ambion, Austin, TX, USA). The aRNAs were labeled with Cy5 and co-hybridized with Cy3 labeled Stratagene reference aRNA. For some samples, the mRNA was amplified and hybridized in duplicate or triplicate. The samples were then hybridized to HEEBO microarrays. The arrays were scanned in a low-ozone environment using a GenePix 4000A microarray scanner and images were analyzed with Genepix 5.0 (Axon instruments, Union City, CA).

DESIGN
Using regression correlation

