TITLE
Disrupted processing of long pre-mRNAs and widespread RNA missplicing are components of neuronal vulnerability from loss of nuclear TDP-43 (Affymetrix)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Cross-linking and immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing was used to identify binding sites within 6,304 genes as the brain RNA targets for TDP-43, an RNA binding protein which when mutated causes Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). Use of massively parallel sequencing and splicing-sensitive junction arrays revealed that levels of 601 mRNAs are changed (including Fus/Tls, progranulin, and other transcripts encoding neurodegenerative disease-associated proteins) and 965 altered splicing events are detected (including in sortilin, the receptor for progranulin), following depletion of TDP-43 from adult brain with antisense oligonucleotides. RNAs whose levels are most depleted by reduction in TDP-43 are derived from genes with very long introns and which encode proteins involved in synaptic activity. Lastly, TDP-43 was found to auto-regulate its synthesis, in part by directly binding and enhancing splicing of an intron within the 3’ untranslated region of its own transcript, thereby triggering nonsense mediated RNA degradation.

DESIGN
6 samples of polyA-selected RNA were extracted from control-oligo and Tdp43-targeted oligo mouse striatum, and hybridized to custom splice-junction array. *Addendum Depending on the analysis software used, these CEL files may not load correctly using default parameters. This is due to the custom chip type of MJAY not being used during the array scanning step. There are three workarounds known for this problem so far. 1) If using APT, use multiple --chip-type parameters. Specifically, --chip-type mjay --chip-type MJAY --chip-type MoEx-1_0-st-v1.1sq 2) Edit the CEL file by converting to text using the APT command apt-cel-convert, then replacing the MoEx-1_0-st-v1.1sq in the DatHeader line with MJAY (all caps). 3) Edit the .pgf, .clf, and antigenomics.bmp files to use the MoEx-1_0-st-v1.1sq array instead of MJAY for the chip_type and lib_set_name options. (works on AltAnalyze software)

PLATFORM
GPL13185 [mjay] Custom Affymetrix Mouse Exon Junction Array

CITATIONS
21358643

