TITLE
Postmating transcriptional changes in reproductive tracts of con- and heterospecifically-mated Drosophila mojavensis females

ORGANISM
Drosophila mojavensis

SUMMARY
In internally fertilizing organisms, mating involves a series of highly coordinated molecular interactions between the sexes that occur within the female reproductive tract.  In species with promiscuous mating systems, traits involved in postcopulatory interactions are expected to evolve rapidly, potentially leading to postmating-prezygotic (PMPZ) reproductive isolation between diverging populations.  Here, we use a novel study design to investigate the postmating transcriptional response of Drosophila mojavensis female reproductive tracts following copulation with either conspecific or heterospecific (D. arizonae) males at three time points postmating.  Relatively few genes (15 total) were transcriptionally regulated in the female lower reproductive tract in response to conspecific mating.  Heterospecifically-mated females exhibited significant perturbations in the expression of the majority of these genes, and also downregulated transcription of a number of others, including several involved in mitochondrial function.  These striking regulatory differences indicate failed postcopulatory molecular interactions between the sexes consistent with the strong PMPZ isolation observed for this cross.  We also report, for the first time, the transfer of male mRNA transcripts to females during copulation.  These included transcripts from male accessory-gland proteins (ACPs), a finding with potentially broad implications for understanding postcopulatory molecular interactions between the sexes. Dataset from Postmating transcriptional changes in reproductive tracts of con- and heterospecifically-mated Drosophila mojavensis females Bono, JM, Matzkin,LM, Kelleher, ES, and Markow, MA, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA.

DESIGN
The treatments were con- and heterospecific mated D. mojavensis females.  Three different post-copulation times points were assayed, 15 minutes, 2 hours and 6 hours.  For each time point there were two independent replicates.  Additionally, two replicates of a virgin D. mojavensis female control were assayed.  A total of 14 arrays.  All RNA extractions were from the lower reproductive tract of females.

PLATFORM
GPL13212 NimbleGen Matzkin Drosophila mojavensis 70K array v2.0.

CITATIONS
21518862

