TITLE
Expression data from MCF7 cell line after silencing of Estrogen receptor

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
We propose the hypothesis that loss of estrogen receptor function which leads to endocrine resistance in breast cancer, also results in de-differentiation from an epithelial to a mesenchymal phenotype that is responsible for increased aggressiveness and metastatic propensity. siRNA mediated silencing of the estrogen receptor in MCF7 breast cancer cells resulted in estrogen/tamoxifen resistant cells (pII) with altered morphology, increased motility with rearrangement and switch from an actin to a vimentin based cytoskeleton, and ability to invade simulated components of the extracellular matrix. Phenotypic profiling using an Affymetrix Human Genome U133 plus 2.0 GeneChip indicated fold changes ≥ 3 in approximately 2500 identifiable unique sequences, with about 1270 of these being up-regulated in pII cells. Changes were associated with genes whose products are involved in cell motility, loss of cellular adhesion and interaction with the extracellular matrix. Selective analysis of the data also showed a shift from luminal to basal cell markers and increased expression of a wide spectrum of genes normally associated with mesenchymal characteristics, with consequent loss of epithelial specific markers. Over-expression of several peptide growth factors and their receptors are indicative of an increased contribution to the higher proliferative rates of pII cells as well as aiding their potential for metastatic activity. Signalling molecules that have been identified as key transcriptional drivers of epithelial to mesenchymal transition were also found to be elevated in pII cells. We suggest that these data support our hypothesis that induced loss of estrogen receptor in previously antiestrogen sensitive cells is a trigger for the concomitant loss of endocrine dependence and onset of a series of possibly parallel events that changes the cell from an epithelial to a mesenchymal type. Inhibition of this transition through targeting of specific mediators may be a useful supplementary strategy to circumvent the effects of loss of endocrine sensitivity. We used microarrays to detail the global programme of gene expression underlying Epithelial to mesenchymal transition and identified distinct classes of regulated genes during this process.

DESIGN
MCF7 cell line was selected before and after (PII) silencing of Estrogen receptor for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix expression microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21713035

