TITLE
Age-related change of callus formation capability in Arabidopsis hypocotyls

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Transcriptional profiling of age-related change of callus formation capability in Arabidopsis hypocotyls Organogenesis in vitro consists of many aspects such as phytohormone perception, dedifferentiation of differentiated cell to acquire organogenic competence, and re-entry of quiescent cells into cell cycle.  In this study, we established an in vitro experimental system to study the age-dependent callus formation capacity in Arabidopsis.  Interestingly, mature (35- to 38-day-old) hypocotyl explants exhibited better callus-forming potential than that of juvenile (7- to 10-day-old), determined by callus growth rates.  To explore genome-wide expression changes underlying the phenomenon of age-dependent callus formation, a transcriptome-based analysis was performed.  Gene expression profiling indicated that age-dependent callus formation capacity was associated with changes in phytohormone (auxins, cytokinins, abscisic acid, brassinosteroids and gibberellins) homeostasis, epigenetic mechanism and the cell cycle regulation.  Besides, we identified two groups of genes involved in age-dependent callus formation capacity: (1) positive regulatory and (2) negative regulatory categories, i.e. genes that were significantly up- or down-regulated during callus formation derived from mature explants, respectively. One gene encoding DNA-binding protein (VARIANT IN METHYLATION 1, VIM1) belonging to the positive regulatory category was selected for functional analysis and assessment of age-dependent callus formation capacity.  Indeed, vim1 reduced the efficiency of callus formation in mature explants, but not in juvenile.  The result suggests that VIM1 plays an important role in regulating age-dependent callus formation capacity.  Taken together, the investigation will help to better understand the molecular regulatory mechanism of age-dependent callus formation.

DESIGN
Comparison of young and mature Arabidopsis hypocotyls either with or without auxin treatment for 1 day

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
22706032

