TITLE
Clone History Shapes Populus Drought Responses

ORGANISM
Populus x canadensis ; Populus hybrid sp. 'Walker' ; Populus hybrid sp. 'Okanese'

SUMMARY
Just as animal monozygotic twins can experience different environmental conditions by being reared apart, individual genetically-identical trees of the genus Populus can also be exposed to contrasting environmental conditions by being grown in different locations.  As such, clonally-propagated Populus trees provide an opportunity to interrogate the impact of individual environmental history on current response to environmental stimuli.  To test the hypothesis that current responses to an environmental stimulus, drought, are contingent on environmental history, the transcriptome-level drought responses of three economically important hybrid genotypes: DN34 (Populus deltoides x P. nigra); Walker (P. deltoides var. occidentalis x (P. laurifolia x P. nigra)); and, Okanese (‘Walker’ x (P. laurifolia x P. nigra)) derived from two different locations were compared. Strikingly, differences in transcript abundance patterns in response to drought were based on differences in geographic origin of clones for two of the three genotypes. This observation was most pronounced for the genotypes with the longest time since establishment and last common propagation.  Differences in genome-wide DNA methylation paralleled the transcriptome level trends, where the clones with the most divergent transcriptomes and clone history had the most marked differences in the extent of total DNA methylation, suggesting an epigenetic basis for the clone-history-dependent transcriptome divergence. The data provide insights into the interplay between genotype and environment in the ecologically and economically important Populus genus, with implications for both the industrial application of Populus trees, and the evolution and persistence of these important tree species.

DESIGN
72 arrays total. 2 time points. 2 water regimes. 3 biological replicates per treatment

PLATFORM
GPL4359 [Poplar] Affymetrix Poplar Genome Array

CITATIONS
21746919

