TITLE
Analysis of the host microRNA response to Salmonella uncovers the control of major cytokines by the let-7 family

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
MicroRNAs have well-established roles in eukaryotic host responses to viruses and extracellular bacterial pathogens. In contrast, microRNA responses to invasive bacteria have remained unknown. Here, we report cell type-dependent microRNA regulations upon infection of mammalian cells with the enteroinvasive pathogen, Salmonella Typhimurium. Murine macrophages strongly up-regulate NF-κB associated microRNAs; strikingly, these regulations which are induced by the bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPS) occur and persist regardless of successful host invasion and/or replication, or whether an inflammatory response is mounted, suggesting that microRNAs belong to the first line of anti-bacterial defence. However, a suppression of the global immune regulator miR-155 in endotoxintolerant macrophages revealed that microRNA responses also depend on the status of infected cells. This study identifies the let-7 family as the common denominator of Salmonella regulated microRNAs in macrophages and epithelial cells, and suggests that repression of let-7 relieves cytokine IL-6 and IL-10 mRNAs from negative post-transcriptional control. Our results establish a paradigm of microRNA-mediated feed-forward activation of inflammatory factors when mammalian cells are targeted by bacterial pathogens.

DESIGN
The murine macrophage cell-line RAW 264.7 was exposed to wild-type Salmonella typhimurium SL1344 or to the corresponding knockout strain lacking both major genomic loci associated with Salmonella pathogenicity ( " SPI1 " and " SPI2 " ). To induce infectivity overnight cultures of Salmonella were dilluted 1:100 and grown to OD2. Host cells at a density of approximately 10e6 per well of a 6-well plate were infected at an MOI of 1. Upon initial incubation for 30 min cells were further incubated for 24 h in RPMI supplemented with gentamicin (10 µg / ml). As determined by a gentamicin protection and plating assay the SPI1/2 double knockout strain is deficient in both invasion and intracellular replication. We compared mouse mRNA abundances between cells infected with wild-type ( " 24WT " ) or SPI1/2 knockout Salmonella ( " 24SPI1/2 " ) and non-infected, mock-treated controls ( " 24C " ). Both strains mounted a similar inflammatory response as judged from the abundance of pro-inflammatory genes compared to the controls. These data indicate, that macrophages can mount a full inflammatory response to extracellular bacteria, that is not further enhanced or attenuated by the sensing of intracellular bacteria. Murine RAW 264.7 cells were rendered endotoxin-tolerant by pre-exposure to heat-killed Salmonella typhimurium SL1344 ( " HKS " ) at an MOI of 10 for 20 h. 5 days upon removal of the HKS stimulus cells were exposed to wild-type Salmonella typhimurium SL1344 or to the corresponding knockout strain lacking both major genomic loci associated with Salmonella pathogenicity ( " SPI1 " and " SPI2 " ). To induce infectivity overnight cultures of Salmonella were dilluted 1:100 and grown to OD2. Host cells at a density of approximately 10e6 per well of a 6-well plate were infected at an MOI of 1. Upon initial incubation for 30 min cells were further incubated for 24 h in RPMI supplemented with gentamicin (10 µg / ml). As determined by a gentamicin protection and plating assay the SPI1/2 double knockout strain is deficient in both invasion and intracellular replication. The wild-type Salmonella strain invades and replicates in endotoxin-tolerant RAW 264.7 cells, though the intracellular replication rate is significantly reduced (by roughly 40 %) compared to naive RAW 264.7 cells. We compared mouse mRNA abundances between cells infected with wild-type ( " wt " ) and non-infected, mock-treated controls ( " Mock " ) or between wild-type ( " wt " ) and SPI1/2-knockout ( " SPI1/2 " ) infected cells. As apparent from the Microarray data the wild-type Salmonella strain induces a typical inflamatory response in endotoxin-tolerant RAW 264.7 cells (as judged from the fold-induction of NFkB-inducible genes). As expected however, mRNAs corresponding to known inflammatory genes are significantly less abundant in response to the non-invasive SPI1/2 knockout strain, compared to wild-type infection. These data indicate, that endotoxin-tolerance renders macrophages largely insensitive to extracellular, but not to intracellular bacteria. ***This submission represents the mRNA component of the study

