TITLE
Murine lung transcripts during soluble egg antigen (SEA)-induced allergic asthma and bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in Wildtype, IL-13Ra1 and IL-13Ra2 deficient mice sensitized and challenged

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Transcriptional profiling of mouse lungs by comparing PBS and saline treated lungs with SEA and bleomycin treated lungs, respectively. Mice strains used in this study include wild type (C57BL/6), IL-13Ra1 and IL-13Ra2 deficient mice.

DESIGN
In mouse model of allergic asthma, mice were sensitized twice (day0 and day14) by i.p. injection of 10 µg of SEA. On days 28 and 31 mice were anesthetized with a mixture of xylazine and ketamine and given an intratracheal (I.T) airway challenge with 10 µg of SEA. Mice were sacrificed 24 h after the final airway challenge (day 32) and lungs were collected for RNA preparation. Biological replicates include 5 PBS treated and 5 SEA treated mice. In bleomycin-induced fibrosis odel, mice were anaesthetized with a xylazine and ketamine cocktail and given 0.15 U bleomycin sulfate (EMD) in saline or saline alone via the I.T. route. On day 7, mice were sacrificed and ungs were collected for RNA preparation. Biological replicates include 4 saline treated and 4 bleomycin treated mice. Goal was to determine IL-13 receptors regulated genes during SEA induced allergic asthma and bleomycin-induced fibrosis. Fluorescent cDNA targets were prepared from a 20 μg experimental RNA sample (SEA or bleomycin challenged group–dUTPCy5 – Amersham, Piscataway, NJ) and a 20 μg reference RNA sample (PBS or saline treated group–dUTPCy3- Amersham, Piscataway, NJ). Equal quantities of the above labeled cDNA (experimental and reference labeled RNA samples) were mixed and any free label present in the sample was removed by washing 3 times using a 10 kDa cutoff Vivaspin filters (Millipore). Labeled fluorescent cDNA targets were hybridized on the Whole Mouse Genome Oligo Microarray Kit (Agilent, Palo Alto, CA) containing more than 41000 gene probes.

PLATFORM
GPL9354 NIAID Mmeb -- Mouse 44k - mAdb version

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

