TITLE
Gene expression of expanded and non-expanded natural killer cells from healthy donor and myeloma patients

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Natural Killer cells (NK), a major constituent of innate immune system, have the ability to kill the transformed and infected cells without prior sensitization; can be put to immunotherapeutic use against various malignancies. NK cells discriminate between normal cells and transformed cells via a balance of inhibitory and activating signals induced by interactions between NK cell receptors and target cell ligands. Present study investigates whether expansion of NK cells could augment their anti-myeloma (MM) activity.  For NK cell expansion, peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy donors and myeloma patients were co-cultured with irradiated K562 cells transfected with 4-1BBL and membrane-bound IL15 (K562-mb15-41BBL). A genome-wide profiling approach was performed to identify gene expression signature in expanded NK (ENK) cells and non-expanded NK cells isolated from healthy donors and myeloma patients. A specific set of genes involved in proliferation, migration, adhesion, cytotoxicity, and activation were up regulated post expansion, also confirmed by flow cytometry. Exp-NK cells killed both allogeneic and autologous primary MM cells more avidly than non-exp-NK cells in vitro. Multiple receptors, particularly NKG2D, natural cytotoxicity receptors, and DNAM-1 contributed to target lysis, via a perforin mediated mechanism. In summary, vigorous expansion and high anti-MM activity both in vitro and in vivo provide the rationale for testing exp-NK cells in a clinical trial for high risk MM. Differential gene expression profile in expanded natural killer (ENK) cells and non-expanded natural killer (NK) cells from healthy donors and myeloma patients

DESIGN
Eight healthy donor and eight myeloma patients were used in the study. Non-expanded natural killer (NK) cells were isolated from PBMCs of healthy donors and myeloma patients. Expanded natural killer (ENK) cells were generated from same set of samples as mentioned in expansion protocol. All ENK and NK cells were used for gene expression profiling.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
22419581

