TITLE
The effect of milk accumulation on gene expression in bovine mammary gland

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
We hypothesized that accumulation of milk would influence gene expression in the mammary gland of lactating dairy cows.  To test this hypothesis, we enrolled 4 multiparous Holstein cows (150 ± 10 DIM) in a half-udder milk stasis experiment.  On day 1 of the experiment, cows were milked at 0430 h and at 1430 h, only right udder halves were milked.  Mammary biopsies were obtained from both udder halves on day 2 of the experiment at 0500 h, immediately after right udder halves were milked and 12 h since left udder halves had last been milked.  Using Affymetrix GeneChip® Bovine Genome Arrays, we identified 32 genes that were differentially expressed between left (full) and right (empty) udder halves (fold change > 1.5; P < 0.05).  Four of the genes were downregulated in response to milk stasis, whereas 28 were upregulated.  Differentially expressed genes were associated with extracellular matrix remodeling, tight junction formation, regulation of blood flow, and apoptosis.  In addition, four of the differentially expressed genes had been previously identified as candidates for local regulation of milk production in dairy cows.  Expression of two of these candidates, early growth response-1 (EGR-1) and thrombospondin-1 (THBS-1), was validated using real-time quantitative RT-PCR.  Consistent with microarray results, both genes were upregulated in response to 24-h of milk stasis (P < 0.03).  Immunofluorescence was used to localize expression of EGR-1 protein, which was restricted to epithelia and was uniformly distributed.  We conclude that accumulation of milk alters gene expression in the bovine mammary gland.  In particular, EGR-1 and THBS-1 have emerged as strong candidates for local regulation of milk production in dairy cows.

DESIGN
8 samples from 4 cows

PLATFORM
GPL2112 [Bovine] Affymetrix Bovine Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

