TITLE
Linking phytoplankton community composition to seasonal changes in f ratio

ORGANISM
synthetic construct ; marine metagenome

SUMMARY
Seasonal changes in nitrogen assimilation have been studied in the western English Channel by sampling at approximately weekly intervals for 12 months. Nitrate concentrations showed strong seasonal variations. Available nitrogen in the winter was dominated by nitrate but this was close to limit of detection from May to September, after the spring phytoplankton bloom. 15N uptake experiments showed that nitrate was the nitrogen source for the spring phytoplankton bloom but regenerated nitrogen supported phytoplankton productivity throughout the summer. The average annual f ratio was 0.35, which demonstrated the importance of ammonia regeneration in this dynamic temperate region. Nitrogen uptake rate measurements were related to the phytoplankton responsible by assessing the relative abundance of nitrate reductase (NR) genes and the expression of NR among eukaryotic phytoplankton. Strong signals were detected from NR sequences that are not associated with known phylotypes or cultures. NR sequences from the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum were highly represented in gene abundance and expression, and were significantly correlated with f ratio. The results demonstrate that analysis of functional genes provides additional information, and may be able to give better indications of which phytoplankton species are responsible for the observed seasonal changes in f ratio than microscopic phytoplankton identification.

DESIGN
NR gene diversity from seawater (two replicates of 16 blocks per array, 8 replicate features per probe, duplicate arrays for some samples) The arrays contain three sets of probes for different applications (rbcL and nitrate reductase (NR) from phytoplankton, and amoA from ammonia oxidizing bacteria). The paper to which this submission relates, and the experiments reported in it, used only the NR probe set.

PLATFORM
GPL13292 Princeton Biocomplexity Project, BC008 and BC009 arrays

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

