TITLE
Identification of novel target genes of nerve growth factor (NGF) in human mastocytoma cell line (HMC-1 (V560G c-Kit)) by transcriptome analysis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Nerve growth factor (NGF) pays a role in neuronal differentiation and may also play a  role in hematopoietic differentiation as shown by synergistic action for the colony formation of CD34 positive hematopoietic progenitor cells treated with M-CSF or SCF. However, the exact role of NGF in hematopoietic system is unclear. It is also not clear whether NGF mediated signals in hematopoietic cells are identical to those in neuronal cells. To study the signal transduction pathways induced by NGF treatment in hematopoietic cells, we utilized the mastocytoma cell line HMC-1 (V560G c-Kit) which expresses the NGF receptor, TrkA, as well as the constitutively activated SCF receptor, V560G c-Kit, which can be inhibited by treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate. NGF rescues HMC-1 (V560G c-Kit) from imatinib induced cell death and promotes proliferation. To examine the NGF mediated proliferation and survival in these cells, we compared the NGF mediated upregulated genes (30 and 120 min after stimulation) to the downregulated genes by imatinib treatment (downregulation of c-Kit activity for 4 h) by transcriptome analysis. The following conclusions can be drawn from the microarray data: Firstly, gene expression profiling reaveals 50% overlap of genes induced by NGF-TrkA with genes expressed downstream of V560G c-Kit. Secondly, NGF treatment does not enhance expression of genes involved in immune related functions that were down modulated by imatinib. Thirdly, more than 55% of common upregulated genes are involved in cell proliferation and survival. Forthly, we found KLF2 and SMAD7 as the NGF mediated novel down stream genes in hematopoietic cells that may play a role in NGF mediated survival signal in HMC-1 (V560G c-Kit) cells. Keywords: Transcriptome analysis - comparison of TrkA and V560G c-Kit downstream genes in HMC-1 (V560G c-Kit) cells

DESIGN
In total, 4 samples were analyzed, one of which served as a common reference (HMC1 17h SerumStarv 4h Imatinib). This sample was labeled with Cy3. All additional samples were labeled with Cy5 and were cohybridized against the common reference. The first hybridization (M2370) represents a self-self-hybridization using the common reference.

PLATFORM
GPL4133 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
21501463

