TITLE
Dietary exposure of 17-alpha ethinylestradiol modulates physiological endpoints and gene signaling pathways in female largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides)

ORGANISM
Micropterus salmoides

SUMMARY
17alpha-ethinylestradiol (EE2), used for birth control in humans, is a potent estrogen that is found in wastewater at low concentrations (ng/L). EE2 has the ability to interfere with the endocrine system of fish, affecting reproduction which can result in population level effects. The objective of this study was to determine if dietary exposure to EE2 would alter gene expression patterns and key pathways in the liver and ovary and whether these could be associated with reproductive endpoints in female largemouth bass (LMB) during egg development. Female LMB received 70 ng EE2/g feed (feed administered at 1% of body weight) for 60 days. EE2 dietary exposure significantly reduced plasma vitellogenin concentrations by 70%. Hepatosomatic and gonadosomatic indices were also decreased with EE2 feeding by 38.5% and 40%, respectively. Transcriptomic profiling revealed that there were more changes in steady-state mRNA levels in the liver compared to the ovary. Genes associated with reproduction were differentially expressed such as vitellogenin in the liver and aromatase in the gonad. In addition, a set of genes related with oxidative stress (e.g., glutathione reductase and glutathione peroxidase) were identified as altered in the liver and genes associated with the immune system (e.g., complement component 1, and macrophage-inducible C-type lectin) were altered in the gonad. In a follow-up study with 0.2 ng EE2/g feed for 60 days, similar phenotypic and gene expression changes were observed that support these findings with the higher concentrations. This study provides new insights into how dietary exposure to EE2 interferes with endocrine signaling pathways in female LMB during a critical period of reproductive oogenesis.

DESIGN
Dietary exposure to EE2 would alter gene expression patterns and key pathways in the liver and ovary and these could be associated with reproductive endpoints in female largemouth bass during maturation. Female LMB received about 351 ng EE2 per day (from EE2-laced feed containing 70ng EE2/g feed) for 60 days.

PLATFORM
GPL13229 LMB microarray 15K (Agilent format)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

