TITLE
Genotypic and Phenotypic Versatility of Aspergillus flavus during Maize Exploitation

ORGANISM
Aspergillus flavus

SUMMARY
Several are the inputs which are able to modulate mycotoxin synthesis. In particular, when a fungus receives an external stimulus reacts by activating, through a quite well-defined signal cascade, an evident switch in its lifestyle. This profound change is also due to the activation of global gene regulators and, in particular, of transcription factors able to switch on the mycotoxin gene clusters expression. Aflatoxins (AF) are harmful carcinogenic compounds produced mainly by Aspergillus flavus and A. parasiticus. AF are produced during the contamination of maize kernels into the field, even if their role in phyto-toxicity is not yet assessed. Nevertheless, AF biosynthesis is tightly regulated by host-derived signals. Recently, the nature of some of these signals have been elucidated. In particular, a role in susceptibility and resistance of maize to A. flavus contamination has been assigned to some plant oxylipins. These findings draw a scenario in which a complex interplay is under way between A. flavus and maize. For uncovering all the implications of this cross-talk we decide to follow a holistic approach. In particular, we designed experimental conditions aimed to mimic the different phases of A. flavus infection cycle on maize and then by performing a microarray analysis on the harvested mycelia. The microarray data set has been processed for performing the differential expression analysis of almost 14000 gene probes, the pathway analysis based on the gene ontology and inter pro annotations, the secondary metabolites cluster co-expression analysis and an identification of groups of co-expressed neighbor genes, possibly associated with production of secondary metabolites.

DESIGN
Analysis of 12 microarrays monitoring gene expression of Aspergillus flavus over various growth conditions

PLATFORM
GPL8345 [Flavus_22683_AFLAVUSa520391F] NCSU Payne_Aspergillus Array

CITATIONS
23894339

