TITLE
Alteration of gene expression patterns in the liver and spleen following exposure to nucleoprotein diet in the mouse LPS injection model

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
A diet rich in nucleic acids and protamin protein, termed as nucleoprotein (NP), has been attracting a great deal of attention in food science for its beneficial effects. In the present study, we performed a global gene expression profiling in mice fed with NP diet rich in nucleoproteins from the salmon testis. Since our recent research has revealed anti-inflammatory effect of the NP diet, we induced inflammation by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) injection in the mice for this analysis study. Mice were fed with NP diet for 4 weeks followed by a single injection of LPS. The liver and spleen were removed 6 h post-LPS injection. Total RNA extracted from livers (L) and spleens (S) was pooled in each group (control and NP diet), prior to DNA microarray analysis (Agilent mouse whole genome 4 x 44K). Results revealed 322 & 702 up ( > 1.5 fold)- and down ( < 0.75 fold)-regulated genes in the liver, and 325 & 501 up- and down-regulated genes in the spleen, respectively following NP diet. Analysis of genes related to inflammation suggests increased activity of immune function during acute period of LPS injection, which may contribute to early demise of inflammation. NP diet can be expected to be useful for inhibition of inflammatory reactions whose over-accumulation is thought to be related to the acceleration of aging process.

DESIGN
To investigate the effect of NP, we added S-nuclegen® at a concentration of 1.2% into CLEA basic purified diet (CLEA JAPAN, Inc., Tokyo, Japan) known to include nucleic acids (NAs) at much lower amounts than standard diet. By HPLC analysis CLEA basic purified diet (low NP), and 1.2% NP diet included 0.03%, and 0.5% NAs, respectively. Male C57BL/6J mice (7 weeks) were fed with NP diet for 4 weeks followed by a single injection of LPS at a dose of 10 mg/kg. The liver and spleen were removed 6 h post-LPS injection. Total RNA extracted from livers and spleens was pooled in each group (control and NP diet), prior to DNA microarray analysis (Agilent mouse whole genome 4 x 44K).

