TITLE
Quorum sensing and silencing in Vibrio parahaemolyticus

ORGANISM
Vibrio parahaemolyticus

SUMMARY
The quorum regulatory cascade is poorly characterized in Vibrio parahaemolyticus, in part because swarming and pathogenicity - the hallmark traits of the organism - are repressed by this scheme of gene control. As a consequence, many isolates appear silenced for quorum sensing via phase variation. In these studies, we examine a swarm proficient, virulent strain and find an altered function allele of the central quorum regulator luxO. We use this allele, which produces a constitutively active LuxO, to probe the upstream elements of the pathway and demonstrate their functionality for the first time. We find that the state of luxO affects expression of three small regulatory RNAS (Qrrs) and the activity of a translational fusion in opaR, the central output regulator. We use microarray profiling to determine the OpaR regulon, which was found to encompass ~5.2% of the genome. The quorum sensing proficient strain seems adapted for a sessile, community lifestyle; it is competent to uptake DNA, produces much capsular polysaccharide, has a high level of c-di-GMP, and strongly expresses one type six secretion system. Expressing the entire surface sensing regulon and numerous methyl accepting chemotaxis proteins, the quorum-disrupted cell type seems prepared for a mobile lifestyle. It is also cytotoxic to host cells in co-culture and expresses distinct type six as well as type three secretion systems. Thus, the scope and nature of the genes in the OpaR regulon provide many clues to the distinguishing traits of this Vibrio species as well as to the quite divergent survival strategies of the quorum ON/OFF phase variants

DESIGN
The gene expression profiles of different strains of Vibrio parahaemolyticus cells grown on rich medium and compared using Affymetrix custom microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL8837 [rhofispaa520260F] Custom Vibrio parahaemolyticus GeneChip Array (Affymetrix)

CITATIONS
21705592

