TITLE
NKX3-1, a Novel Transcriptional Factor of AR, Promotes Prostate Cancer Cell Survival via RAB3B GTPase-mediated protein trafficking

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Androgen receptor (AR) orchestrates an intricate transcriptional regulatory network that governs prostate cancer initiation, development and progression. To understand this network in detail, we generated genome-wide maps of AR occupancy by ChIP-seq in LNCaP cells. We found NKX3-1, an androgen-dependent homeobox protein well-characterized for its role in prostate development and differentiation, being recruited to AR binding sites (ARBS) in response to androgen signaling. We identified 6,359 NKX3-1 binding sites, most of which overlapped with AR. In addition to its novel collaborative transcriptional role at well-known prostate cancer model genes, our binding and knockdown studies further suggested that NKX3-1 potentially regulates AR in a feed-forward manner. Integrative analysis of Oncomine molecular concepts showed that these androgen-regulated AR and NKX3-1 associated genes are significantly overexpressed in prostate carcinoma as well as advanced and recurrent prostate tumors. From our transcriptomic profiling and Gene Ontology analysis, we observed that AR and NKX3-1 co-regulate genes involved in " protein trafficking " processes, which are mandatory events in the integration of oncogenic signaling pathways leading to prostate cancer development and progression. Interestingly, we found that AR and NKX3-1 co-regulate several members of the RAB GTPase family of secretory/trafficking proteins via the involvement of FoxA1 in a ternary complex and we believe that these AR/NKX3-1/FoxA1 co-regulated RAB genes could serve as expression signatures in prostate carcinogenesis.  More specifically, through functional analyses, we showed that NKX3-1, together with AR and FoxA1, could promote prostate cancer cell survival through activation of RAB3B expression. Collectively, our study has provided important insights into the hierarchical transcriptional regulatory network established between AR and NKX3-1 and sought to elucidate the important genetic-molecular-phenotypic paradigm in androgen-dependent prostate cancer.

DESIGN
Genome-wide binding analyses of AR, NKX3-1 and FoxA1 in LNCaP with or without DHT (5alpha-dihydrotestosterone) stimulation using ChIP-Seq.

PLATFORM
GPL9115 Illumina Genome Analyzer II (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
22083957

