TITLE
Expression of marker genes in the lymph nodes predicts the recurrence of  squamous cell vulvar carcinoma.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
BACKGROUND: Regional lymph node (LN) status is a well-known prognostic  factor for vulvar carcinoma (VC) patients. Although the reliable LN  assessment in VC is crucial, it presents significant diagnostic problems.  PURPOSE: We aimed to identify specific mRNA markers of VC dissemination in  the LN and to address the feasibility of predicting the risk of nodal  recurrence by the patterns of gene expression.  EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Sentinel and inguinal LN samples from 20 patients who  had undergone surgery for stage T1-3, N0-2, M0 primary vulvar squamous  cell carcinoma were analyzed. Gene expression profiles were assessed in  four metastatic [LN(+)] and four histologically negative [LN(-)] lymph  node samples obtained from four VC patients, by the Affymetrix U133 Plus  2.0 gene expression microarrays. Of the set of genes of the highest  expression in the metastatic LNs compared to LN(-), seven candidate marker  genes were selected PERP, S100A8, FABP5, SFN, CA12, JUP and CSTA, and the  expression levels of these genes were further analyzed by the real-time  reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) in 71 LN  samples.  RESULTS: Five of the genes, PERP, S100A8, FABP5, SFN and CA12, were  significantly increased in LN(+) compared to LN(-) samples. In the initial  validation of the seven putative markers of metastatic LN, the Cox  proportional hazard model pointed to SFN and CA12 expression to  significantly relate to the time to groin recurrence in VC patients.  CONCLUSIONS: PERP, S100A8, FABP5, SFN and CA12 have a potential of marker  genes for the molecular testing of LN involvement in VC patients.

DESIGN
Gene expression profiles of 8 tissue samples representing 4 metastatic [N(+)] and 4 histologically negative [N(-)] LN samples

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

