TITLE
miR-29c Targets Tropomyosin-1α and Is Down-regulated in Rat Remnant Kidneys and IgA Nephropathy Patients with Interstitial Fibrosis

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small regulatory RNA molecules that modulate the activity of specific mRNA targets and play important roles in a wide range of physiologic and pathologic processes.  We hypothesized that miRNAs might be involved in the progression of CKD.  In our previous studies we found chronic renal damages developed progressively in rats with 5/6 nephrectomy.  L-mimosine(L-Mim) intervention from wk 5 to wk 12 improved renal function and resulted in additional accumulation of HIF-1 α and -2 α at wk 12.  In the current study we found miR-29c was up-regulated in the L-Mim treated group compared with the control using Agilent miRNA microarrays.  Of the microRNAs and proteins that exhibited reciprocal changes in expression following the L-Mim treatment, miR-29c and tropomyosin 1α (TPM1), which is involved in stress fiber function, met the sequence criteria for microRNA-target interaction,  were later confirmed by 3'-untranslated region reporter analysis.  TGFβ1 treatment (3 ng/ml, 24 hours) decreased miR-29c expression and up-regulated protein expression of TPM1 in human renal epithelial cells. Overexpression of miR-29c significantly attenuated TGF-β1 induced increase in TPM1 in vitro. Moreover,  intrarenal expression of miR-29c was decreased in IgAN patients with moderate to severe tubulointerstital fibrosis (TIF), compared with IgAN patients without TIF, and intrarenal protein expression of TMP1 was significantly increased in IgAN patients with TIF.  The results suggest that intrarenal expression of miR-29c was down-regulated while its predicted target, TPM1 was up-regulated in the progression of CKD.  Short term stabilizing of HIF up-regulates miR-29c and attenuates CKD in the remnant kidney model.

DESIGN
Four weeks after 5/6 nephrectomy, rats were treated with intraperitoneal injections of vehicle or L-mimosine (L-Mim, Calbiochem), a prolyl 4-hydroxylase inhibitor (PHD), at a dosage of 50 mg/kg every other day.  At the end of wk 12 after 5/6 nephrectomy, all rats (n=4, for each group) were sacrificed and blood samples were collected via cardiac puncture.  Renal tissue were harvested, one piece of which was fixed in neutral formalin and then embedded in paraffin.  The remaining kidney tissue was dissected in ice-cold PBS to, remove medulla, and then snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen before transferring to storage at -80°C until further analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL10906 Agilent-019159 Rat miRNA Microarray (miRBase release 12.0 miRNA ID version)

CITATIONS
23467423

