TITLE
Germline and embryo gene expression of wild-type vs. mutants in lin-54, a component of the C. elegans DRM complex

ORGANISM
Caenorhabditis elegans

SUMMARY
DRM is a conserved transcription factor complex that includes E2F/DP and pRB family proteins and plays important roles in development and cancer. Here we perform microarray expression profiling analysis of lin-54, a DNA-binding member of the DRM complex. To identify genes regulated by LIN-54 in soma and germline, we analyzed wild-type and lin-54 mutant C. elegans embryos and isolated germlines. We chose embryos because they consist primarily of somatic cells, at a developmental stage with both active cell divisions and dynamic developmental gene expression programs. Since lin-54 null animals are sterile, embryos were obtained from a strain carrying the partial loss-of-function allele lin-54(n2990). Germlines were dissected from lin-54(n3423) null adults that lack detectable  transcript and protein. The results revealed conserved roles for DRM in regulating genes involved in cell division, development, and reproduction. We find LIN-54 promotes expression of reproduction genes in the germline, but prevents ectopic activation of germline-specific genes in embryonic soma. Strikingly, genomics and cytological analyses show that DRM binding, a DRM binding motif, and LIN-54-regulated genes are all autosome-enriched. One paradoxical exception occurs the germline, where DRM binds autosomes but genes down-regulated in DRM mutants are enriched on X chromosomes.

DESIGN
We compared embryonic or germline gene expression profile of lin-54 mutants with that of wild-type N2 C. elegans. Embryos were obtained from a strain carrying the partial loss-of-function allele lin-54(n2990) grown at 25C for one generation. Germlines were isolated from lin-54(n3423) null adults that lack detectable lin-54 transcript and protein. We isolated the germline region from the tip until late pachytene stage of meiosis, because nuclei in this region are morphologically similar between wild-type and mutant and are all undergoing X chromosome silencing. 3 biological replicates of each genotype/tissue were examined.

PLATFORM
GPL200 [Celegans] Affymetrix C. elegans Genome Array

CITATIONS
21589891

