TITLE
Expression data from Xenopus laevis liver

ORGANISM
Xenopus laevis

SUMMARY
Pregnane X receptor (PXR) is generally considered the most important sensor of natural and anthropogenic xenobiotics in vertebrates. In Xenopus, however, PXR plays a role in neural development and it is irresponsive to xenobiotics. We report a first broad-spectrum amphibian xenobiotic receptor, which is an ortholog of the mammalian constitutive androstane receptor (CAR). The low basal activity and pronounced responsiveness to activators such as drugs and steroids displayed by the Xenopus CAR resemble PXR, which both trace back to a common ancestor early in the divergence of land vertebrates. The constitutive activity of CAR emerged first in Sauropsida (reptiles and birds) and it is common to all fully terrestrial land vertebrates (Amniota). This activity can be mimicked by humanizing just two amino acids of the Xenopus CAR. These results demonstrate a remarkable plasticity of CAR which enabled its employment as Xenopus xenosensors. They open way to toxicogenomic and bioaugmentation studies in amphibians, a critically endangered taxon of land vertebrates. Taken together, we provide evidence for a much earlier origin of CAR, for its conservation in tetrapods which exceeds that of PXR, and for its remarkable functional plasticity which enabled its role as a PXR-like xenosensor in Amphibia.

DESIGN
We used microarrays to detect global transcriptional changes in Xenopus laevis livers following pregnenolone and artemisinin treatment in order to identify target genes of xlCAR. Arteminisin or pregnenolone were injected intraperitoneally into three frogs on two consecutive days. The control group received in parallel two DMSO injections. All frogs were sacrificed 24 h after the second injection by decapitation, and livers were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. After RNA isolation, specimens within the same experimental group were pooled.

PLATFORM
GPL10756 [X_laevis_2] Affymetrix Xenopus laevis Genome 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
22074953

