TITLE
Activity of SigB Modulates Virulence Gene Expression in a Murine Staphylococcus aureus Infection Model but Does Not Influence the Host Kidney Gene Expression

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background.  Infections caused by Staphylococcus aureus are associated with significant morbidity and mortality and are an increasing threat not only in hospital settings. The expression of the staphylococcal virulence factor repertoire is known to be affected by the alternative sigma factor B (SigB). However, its impact during infection still is a matter of debate.  Methods.  Kidney tissue of controls or mice infected with S. aureus HG001 or its isogenic sigB mutant was analyzed by transcriptome profiling to monitor the host response, and additionally expression of selected S. aureus genes was monitored by RT-qPCR.  Results.  Direct transcript analysis by RT-qPCR revealed significant SigB activity in all mice infected with the wild type strain (WT), but not in its isogenic sigB mutant (p < 0.0001). Despite a clear cut difference in the SigB-dependent transcription pattern of virulence genes (clfA, aur, and hla), the host reaction to infection (either WT or sigB mutant) was almost identical.  Conclusions.  Despite its significant activity in vivo, loss of SigB did not have an effect on the outcome of infection as well as on murine kidney gene expression pattern. Thus, these data support the role of SigB as virulence modulator rather than being a virulence determinant by itself.

DESIGN
Murine kidney gene expression pattern of 3 groups were compared: 1) after infection with S. aureus HG001 (wild type); 2) after infection with S. aureus HG001 ΔsigB; 3) sham control (injection of physiological saline solution). The infection was performed twice (2 biological replicates), and the array analysis included 4 or 5 mice (independent samples) per group. In total, the study consisted of 24 arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
22019488

