TITLE
Identification of new genes involved in human adipogenesis and fat storage

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Since the worldwide increase in obesity represents a growing challenge for the health care systems, new approaches are needed to treat obesity and associated disease effectively. The food intake is primarily stored in the adipose tissue and therefore this organ is in focus to develop new anti-obesity treatments. To provide a systematic analysis of genes that regulate adipose tissue biology and to establish a target-oriented compound screening, we performed a high throughput siRNA screen with primary (pre)adipocytes, using a druggable siRNA library targeting 7,784 human genes. Beside well known regulators of adipogenesis and neutral lipid storage (like PPAR?, RXR, Perilipin A) the screening revealed a large number of genes which were not previously described in the context of fatty tissue biology. An enrichment of genes was observed for axonemal dyneins. Five out of ten anxonemal dyneins were identified in our primary screen and retested positive with independent siRNAs and cell-donors. Quantitative RT-PCR- and immunoblot analysis revealed that axonemal dyneins are expressed in preadipocytes and maturing adipocytes. Using microarray analysis, we further characterize the remaining genes identified in our primary screen to determine their expression pattern during adipogenesis. In the course of fat cell differentiation, 149 among the 459 positive genes were regulated on the gene expression level. Assuming that an adipogenesis-specific expression pattern is another independent hind, that these genes are involved in neutral lipid storage and/or adipocyte differentiation, we retested this gene-pool with independent siRNAs and cell donors. Finally, to show that the genes identified are per se druggable we performed a proof of principle experiment using an antagonist for one randomly chosen gene. The results showed a very similar phenotype compared to knock-down experiments proofing the druggability. Thus, we identified new adipogenesis-associated genes and those involved in neutral lipid storage. Moreover, by using a druggable siRNA library the screen data provides a very attractive starting point, to identify anti-obesity compounds targeting the adipose tissue.

DESIGN
For microarray analysis, RNA was isolated at 3 different points in time during adipogenesis (day 0, day 3 and day 7 after induction of differentiation). This experiment was carried out with cells obtained from three different donors. No replicates are included for each point in time.

PLATFORM
GPL4133 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
22384002

