TITLE
Steen-5R01NS042241-03

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
The adult somatosensory cortex undergoes reorganization in response to changes in peripheral input, such as limb usage patterns or denervation/amputation. This reorganization underlies important phenomena, such as phantom pain, recovery after stroke, and certain forms of learning.  Although cellular processes, such as LTP, receptor regulation, axonal growth and synaptic formation have been theorized and studied in relation to cortical reorganization, conclusive evidence remains elusive.  The identification of genes up- and down-regulated during reorganization will provide clues for which processes underlie reorganization.  Reorganization is likely to involve forms of signaling between cortical neurons (e.g. release of growth factors), which could be identified through gene chip studies.  Identification of genes modulated during reorganization will provide specific direction for further studies in the elucidation of the mechanism(s) underlying cortical reorganization. To identify those genes with altered regulation during the cortical reorganization process. We hypothesize that genes regulated during cortical reorganization will be components of the mechanism(s) underlying this important process, and that identification of these genes will provide insight for the design of further studies of cortical plasticity. Cortical reorganization in rat somatosensory cortex (S1) will be induced at the forepaw/lower jaw border by partially denervating the paw.  The animals will be recovered and the reorganization allowed to proceed for 3, 7, 14 and 28 days.  Control animals will receive a sham denervation.  Following the allotted time, the border between the lower jaw and the now silent forepaw cortex will be mapped in vivo.  A 500 um wide strip of cortex surrounding the border area will be excised and stored in RNAlater (Qiagen) at 20oC until processed for RNA extraction.  The tissue will be dispersed using a disposable pestle and microcentrifuge tube and then homogenized in Qiashredder (Qiagen) columns.  RNA will be extracted using a RNeasy Micro Kit.  However, if the UCLA center has a rotor/stator homogenizer with a microcentrifuge tube sized probe, we would like to discuss the possibility of performing the RNA extraction there (we would expect a better yield, and cannot locate this equipment at UCR).  An initial portion of this study will done for 3 day experimental and sham control animals, plus non-operated animals, with four animals per group.  This will be to determine the variability among our samples and to familiarize our personnel with the process.  The number of samples/group necessary for the remaining time points may be modified based on the results of the 3 day study. Keywords: time-course

DESIGN
as above

PLATFORM
GPL341 [RAE230A] Affymetrix Rat Expression 230A Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

