TITLE
Transcript and metabolite analysis in Trincadeira cultivar reveals novel information regarding the dynamics of grape ripening

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
Background Grapes (Vitis vinifera L.) are economically the most important fruit crop worldwide. However, the complexity of molecular and biochemical events that lead to the onset of ripening of nonclimacteric fruits is not fully understood which is further complicated in grapes due to seasonal and cultivar specific variantion. The Portuguese wine variety Trincadeira gives rise to high quality wines but presents extremely irregular berry ripening among seasons probably due to high susceptibility to abiotic and biotic stresses.  Results Ripening of Trincadeira grapes was studied taking into account the transcriptional and metabolic profilings complemented with biochemical data. The mRNA expression profiles of four time points spanning developmental stages from pea size green berries, through veraison and mature berries (EL 32, EL 34, EL 35 and EL 36) and in two seasons (2007 and 2008) were compared using the Affymetrix GrapeGen® genome array containing 23096 probesets corresponding to 18726 unique sequences. Over 50% of these probesets were significantly differentially expressed (1.5 fold) between at least two developmental stages. A common set of modulated transcripts corresponding to 5862 unigenes indicates the activation of common pathways in between years despite the irregular development of Trincadeira grapes. These unigenes were assigned in the functional categories of “metabolism, development”, “cellular process”, “diverse functions”, “regulation overview”, “response to stimulus, stress”, “signaling”, “transport overview”, “xenoprotein, transposable element” and “unknown”. Metabolic profiling using 1H NMR spectroscopy associated to two-dimensional techniques showed the importance of metabolites related to oxidative stress response, amino acid and sugar metabolism as well as secondary metabolism in grape ripening. This information was integrated with transcriptional profiling obtained using genome array and qRT-PCR for five developmental stages (EL 32, EL 34, EL 35, EL 36 and EL 38).  Conclusions  Altogether the results provide new information regarding the network of events leading to grape ripening as well as highlight features that may be cultivar specific namely in what concerns the role of carbohydrates and growth regulators´ metabolism as well as epigenetic factors and signaling pathways.

DESIGN
4 time points in 2007 season. 3 time points in 2008 season. 3 biological replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL11004 Affymetrix GrapeGen Vitis vinifera Microarray [CDF: GrapeGena520510F]

CITATIONS
22047180

