TITLE
Rapid identification of prognostic imaging biomarkers for non-small cell lung cancer by leveraging public gene expression microarray data

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
To rapidly identify new prognostic imaging biomarkers, we propose a bioinformatics approach that integrates gene expression and image data and leverages public gene expression data. We demonstrate our approach in non-small cell lung carcinoma patients for whom CT, PET/CT and gene expression data are available but without clinical follow-up. We extracted 180 image features and 56 high quality gene expression clusters, represented by metagenes. 115 image features were expressed in terms of metagenes, using sparse linear regression and cross-validation, with an accuracy of 65-86%. After mapping the signatures to a public gene expression dataset, 26 image features were significantly associated with recurrence-free survival and 22 with overall survival. A multivariate analysis identified multiple image features that were prognostic, independent of clinical covariates. Identifying prognostic imaging biomarkers by linking images and gene expression with outcomes in public gene expression datasets promises to accelerate the role of imaging in personalized medicine.

DESIGN
We studied 26 cases of NSCLC with both PET/CT and microarray data under IRB approval from Stanford University and the Veterans Administration Palo Alto Health Care System. The collection of tissue samples consisted of a distribution of poorly- to well-differentiated adenocarcinomas and squamous cell cancers. The surgeon had removed necrotic debris during excision and sampled cavitary lesions to include as much solid component as practical. Then, from the excised tumor, he cut a 3 to 5 mm thick slice along its longest axis, and froze it within 30 minutes of excision. We retrieved the frozen tissue and extracted the RNA that was then processed by the Stanford Functional Genomics Facility using Illumina Whole Genome Bead Chips (Human HT-12 v3.0)

PLATFORM
GPL6947 Illumina HumanHT-12 V3.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
22723499 , 22710433

