TITLE
Changes in gene expression in the retina of diabetic Long Evans rats after one, four, and twelve weeks of diabetes

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Purpose. Patients with diabetic retinopathy may experience severe vision loss due to macular edema and neovascularization secondary to vascular abnormalities. However, before these abnormalities become apparent, there are functional deficits in contrast sensitivity, color perception, and dark adaptation. The goals of this study are to evaluate early changes (up to 3 months) in retinal gene expression, selected visual cycle proteins, and optokinetic tracking (OKT) in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic rats.Methods. Retinal gene expression in diabetic Long Evans rats was measured by whole genome microarray 7 days, 4 weeks, and three months after onset of hyperglycemia. Select gene and protein changes were probed by PCR and immunohistochemistry respectively, and OKT thresholds were measured using a virtual optokinetics system. Results. Microarray analysis showed that the most consistently affected molecular and cellular functions were cell-to-cell signaling and interaction, cell death, cellular growth and proliferation, molecular transport, and cellular movement. Further analysis revealed reduced expression of several genes encoding visual cycle proteins including lecithin:retinol acyltransferase (LRAT), retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)-specific protein 65kDa (RPE65) and RPE retinal G protein coupled receptor (RGR). Immunohistochemistry revealed a decrease in RPE65 in the RPE layer of diabetic rats. These molecular changes occurred simultaneously with a decrease in OKT thresholds by 4 weeks of diabetes. Conclusions. The data presented here are further evidence that inner retinal cells are affected by hyperglycemia prior to vasculopathy suggesting that glial and neuronal dysfunction may underlie some of the early visual deficits in diabetics.

DESIGN
At each of the three timepoints (day 7, day 28, and day 84) one retina each from three diabetic rats were pooled for analysis on a single microarray chip. Three independent experiments were conducted for each group (n=9 animals/group). Each timepoint contained a hyperglycemic (STZ) and a control (buffer injection only) group. Additionally, on day 7 gene changes in the retina of rats which received a single injection of STZ, but did not develop hyperglycemia (STZ-non-c) were analyzed.

