TITLE
Resistance to Plasmopara viticola in a grapevine segregating population is associated with stilbenoid accumulation and with specific host transcriptional responses

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
Downy mildew, caused by the oomycete Plasmopara viticola, is a serious disease in Vitis vinifera, the most commonly cultivated grapevine species. Several wild Vitis species have instead shown resistance to this pathogen and they have been used as a source to introgress resistance into a V. vinifera background. Stilbenoids represent the major phytoalexins in grapevine, and their toxicity has been strictly related to the specific compound. The aim of this study was to assess the resistance response to P. viticola of the Merzling x Teroldego cross by profiling the stilbenoid content of the leaves of the entire population and the transcriptome of resistant and susceptible individuals following infection. A three-year analysis of the population?s response to artificial inoculation showed that individuals were distributed in nine classes ranging from total resistance to total susceptibility. In addition, quantitative metabolite profiling of stilbenoids in the population, carried out using HPLC-DAD-MS, identified three distinct groups differing according to the concentrations present and the complexity of their profiles. The high producers were characterized by the presence of trans-resveratrol, trans-piceid, trans-pterostilbene and up to thirteen different viniferins, nine of them new in grapevine. Accumulation of these compounds is consistent with a resistant phenotype and suggests that they may contribute to the resistance response. A preliminary transcriptional study using cDNA-AFLP selected a set of genes modulated by the oomycete in a resistant genotype. The expression of this set of genes in resistant and susceptible genotypes of the progeny population was then assessed by comparative microarray analysis. A group of 57 genes was found to be exclusively modulated in the resistant genotype suggesting that they are involved in the grapevine-P. viticola incompatible interaction. Functional annotation of these transcripts revealed that they belong to the categories defense response, photosynthesis, primary and secondary metabolism, signal transduction and transport.This set of genes should be taken into account in future breeding programs.

DESIGN
Leaves from one resistant (F1 21/66) and two susceptible (F1 22/73 and Teroldego) genotypes were infected with Plasmopara viticola, and transcriptome changes were investigated at 12h and 96h after infection (treated samples) and at 0h after spraying with water (control samples) Two biological replicates were considered and each hybridization was performed three times. One color labeling was performed.

PLATFORM
GPL13450 Grape Custom Array 4x2K developed by Malacarne et al. for grapevine-P.viticola interaction analysis

CITATIONS
21838877

