TITLE
Chromosomal aberrations and aneuploidy in oral potentially malignant lesions: distinctive features for tongue.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The mucosae of the oral cavity are different at the histological level but are all exposed to common genotoxic agents. As a result of this exposure, changes in the mucosal epithelia develop giving rise to Oral Potentially Malignant Lesions (OPMLs), which with time may in turn progress to Oral Squamous Cell Carcinomas (OSCCs). Therefore, much effort should be devoted to identify features able to predict the likeliness of progression associated with an OPML. Such features may be helpful in assisting the clinician to establish both appropriate therapies and follow-up schedules. Here, we report a pilot study that compared the anatomical subsites of OPMLs development with occurrence of DNA aneuploidy and chromosomal copy number aberrations (CNAs). Multiple samples from histologically diagnosed OPMLs were processed for high resolution DNA flow cytometry (hr DNA-FCM) in order to determine the relative DNA content expressed by the DNA index (DI). Additionally, array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization (a-CGH) analysis was performed on FCM-sorted nuclei subpopulations based on DI values. Tongue OPMLs were more frequently associated with DNA aneuploidy and CNAs than OPMLs arising from all the other mucosal subsites. We suggest that the follow-up and the management of the patients with tongue OPMLs should receive a distinctive special attention. Clearly, this conclusion should be validated in a prospective clinical study.  exposed to common genotoxic agents. As a result of this exposure, changes in the  mucosal epithelia develop giving rise to Oral Potentially Malignant Lesions (OPMLs),  which with time may in turn progress to Oral Squamous Cell Carcinomas (OSCCs).  Therefore, much effort should be devoted to identify features able to predict the  likeliness of progression associated with an OPML. Such features may be helpful in  assisting the clinician to establish both appropriate therapies and follow-up  schedules. Here, we report a pilot study that compared the anatomical subsites of  OPMLs development with occurrence of DNA aneuploidy and chromosomal copy  number aberrations (CNAs). Multiple samples from histologically diagnosed OPMLs were processed for high resolution DNA flow cytometry (hr DNA-FCM) in order to determine the relative DNA content expressed by the DNA index (DI). Additionally, array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization (a-CGH) analysis was performed on FCM-sorted nuclei subpopulations based on DI values. Tongue OPMLs were more frequently associated with DNA aneuploidy and CNAs than OPMLs arising from all the other mucosal subsites.  We suggest that the follow-up and the management of the patients with tongue  OPMLs should receive a distinctive special attention. Clearly, this conclusion should  be validated in a prospective clinical study.

DESIGN
We analyzed: 19 samples (4 aneuploid and 15 diploid components) deriving from oral potentially malignant lesions without dysplasia obtained of 16 patients; 14 samples (2 aneuploid and 12 diploid components) deriving from oral potentially malignant lesions with dysplasia obtained from 11 patients (two patients had multiple dysplastic lesions); 2 samples from visually normal mucosa in the near field obtained from two patients with dysplastic lesions. All the aneuploid samples had a purity of at least 90%.

PLATFORM
GPL4093 Agilent-014698 Human Genome CGH Microarray 105A (G4412A)

CITATIONS
21995418

