TITLE
Microarray screening of RNA samples from the olfactory epithelium from wild type and beta3GnT1 mutant mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Dr. Schwarting's research is focused on the analysis of developmentally regulated cell surface molecules and their role in axon guidance and neuronal migration, using the olfactory system as a model. The interaction of cell surface glycans with endogenous lectins in the extracellular matrix provides one mechanism by which axons can utilize specific pathways as they grow towards their targets. Beta3GnT1 mutant mice lose lactosamine expression and have an olfactory axon guidance phenotype (Henion et al, 2005). Olfactory neurons are capable of regeneration and we know that when these neurons regenerate in beta3GnT1 mutant they synthesize lactosamine by a secondary mechanism. By comparing RNA from the olfactory epithelium from wild type and mutant mice, we would expect to see the upregulation of glycosyltransferases that could produce lactosamine in the absence of beta3GnT1. In a preliminary experiment carried out by the CFG staff, we saw that radical fringe, a beta 3GnT, was upregulated in the olfactory epithelium, although it is probably not responsible for the new lactosamine expression. beta3GnT1 Knock out. Strain info: The b3GnT1 mice were generated on a mixed 129Ola-C57BL/6 background and backcrossed to C57BL/6 for four generations. They were then crossed to I7-Internal ribosomal entry site (IRES)-tau greeen fluorescent protein (GFP) mice generated by Dr. Peter Mombaerts.

DESIGN
RNA preparations from wild type and beta3GnT1 mutant mouse olfactory epithelium were sent to Microarray Core (E). Three replicate samples from each condition were used in the study. The RNA was amplified, labeled, and hybridized to the GLYCOv3 microarrays. Data was analyzed to determine glycosyltransferase expression changes in beta3GnT1 mutant mice, with specific interest on glycosyltransferases that could produce lactosamine in the in the absence of beta3GnT1.

