TITLE
To investigate the role of cell surface glycans in CIK cell homing from the bloodstream to the tumor tissue

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Dr. Christopher Contag lab's aim is to, investigate the molecular interactions that underlie CIK cell homing from the bloodstream to tumor tissue using a combination of gene expression profiling, flow cytometry, and in vivo molecular imaging. Collectively, these proposed experiments will define the repertoire of molecules employed in CIK cell recognition of the tumor vasculature and guide the development of improved CIK cell therapies for use in cancer patients. A promising new direction in cancer therapy is the use of cytokine-induced killer (CIK) cells as broadly active tumoricidal agents.  CIK cells derive from blood samples stimulated ex vivo, and these activated immune cells are capable of recognizing and destroying a plethora of tumor targets in vivo.  In fact, CIK cells have demonstrated efficacy in clinical trials to treat patients with hepatoma, renal cell cancer, and hematological malignancies.  Despite the remarkable clinical promise of this therapy, little is known about the mechanisms that govern CIK cell migration to tumor tissue in vivo.  Understanding the trafficking patterns of these potent immune cells is of critical importance to advancing their use in humans.  I aim to investigate the molecular interactions that underlie CIK cell homing from the bloodstream to tumor tissue using a combination of gene expression profiling, flow cytometry, and in vivo molecular imaging.  Collectively, these proposed experiments will define the repertoire of molecules employed in CIK cell recognition of the tumor vasculature and guide the development of improved CIK cell therapies for use in cancer patients.

DESIGN
RNA from three groups (1,2,3) were sent to Microarray Core E.  Group one samples: Splenocytes were obtained from BALB/c mice, and the T cells were isolated using a negative isolation kit (magnetic bead separation).  For group 2 and 3 samples: The isolated splenocytes were treated with IFN-gamma overnight.  The cells were then added to anti-CD3 coated flasks and stimulated with IL-2.  Fresh IL-2 was added to the media every 3 days, and the cells were harvested 12 days post-isolation.  The RNA was labeled and hybridized to Glyco_v3 arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL11096 [GLYCOv3_Mm] Affymetrix Glyco v3 GeneChip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

