TITLE
Pseudomonas aeruginosa two-component regulator BfmR controls bacteriophage lysis and DNA release during biofilm development through PhdA

ORGANISM
Pseudomonas aeruginosa

SUMMARY
Biofilms are surface-adhered bacterial communities encased in an extracellular matrix composed of polysaccharides, proteins, and extracelluar (e)DNA, with eDNA being required for the formation and integrity of biofilms. Here we demonstrate that the spatial and temporal release of eDNA is regulated by BfmR, a regulator essential for Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm development. The expression of bfmR coincided with localized cell death and DNA release, with high eDNA concentrations localized to the outer part of microcolonies in the form of a ring and as a cap on small clusters. Additionally, eDNA release and cell lysis increased significantly following bfmR inactivation. Genome-wide transcriptional profiling indicated that bfmR was required for repression of genes associated with bacteriophage assembly and bacteriophage-mediated lysis. In order to determine which of these genes were directly regulated by BfmR, we utilized chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis to identify the promoter of PA0691, termed here phdA, encoding a previously undescribed homologue of the prevent-host-death (Phd) family of proteins. Lack of phdA expression coincided with impaired biofilm development, increased cell death and bacteriophage release, a phenotype comparable to ΔbfmR. Expression of phdA in ΔbfmR biofilms restored eDNA release, cell lysis, release of bacteriophages, and biofilm formation to wild type levels. Moreover, overexpression of phdA rendered P. aeruginosa resistant to lysis mediated by superinfective bacteriophage Pf4 which was only detected in biofilms. The expression of bfmR was stimulated by conditions resulting in membrane perturbation and cell lysis. Thus, we propose that BfmR regulates biofilm development by controlling bacteriophage-mediated lysis and thus, cell death and eDNA release, via PhdA.

DESIGN
For biofilm growth experiments, three independent replicates of P. aeruginosa strains PAO1 and ΔbfmR were grown as biofilms in a flow-through system using a once-through continuous flow tube reactor system for biofilm sample collection and in flow cells (BioSurface Technologies) for the analysis of biofilm architecture as previously described (Sauer et al., 2002, Sauer et al., 2004, Petrova & Sauer, 2009).  Cells were treated with RNAprotect (Qiagen), and total RNA was extracted using an RNeasy mini purification kit (Qiagen) per the manufacturer’s instructions.  RNA quality and the presence of residual DNA were checked on an Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 electrophoretic system pre- and post-DNase treatment.  Ten micrograms of total RNA was used for cDNA synthesis, fragmentation, and labeling according to the Affymetrix GeneChip P. aeruginosa genome array expression analysis protocol. Sauer, K., A. K. Camper, G. D. Ehrlich, J. W. Costerton & D. G. Davies, (2002) Pseudomonas aeruginosa displays multiple phenotypes during development as a biofilm. J. Bacteriol. 184: 1140-1154. Sauer, K., M. C. Cullen, A. H. Rickard, L. A. H. Zeef, D. G. Davies & P. Gilbert, (2004) Characterization of nutrient-induced dispersion in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 biofilm. J. Bacteriol. 186: 7312-7326. Petrova, O. E. & K. Sauer, (2009) A novel signaling network essential for regulating Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm development. PLoS Pathogens 5: e1000668.

