TITLE
Mechanisms of urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA)-mediated atherosclerosis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Data from clinical studies, cell culture, and animal models implicate the urokinase (uPA)/Plasminogen (Plg) system in the development of atherosclerosis and aneurysms.  However, the mechanisms through which uPA/Plg stimulate these diseases are not yet defined.  We used genetically modified, atherosclerosis-prone mice, including mice with macrophage-specific uPA overexpression to clarify mechanisms of uPA/Plg-accelerated atherosclerosis and aneurysm formation.   Microarray studies were performed to identify potential mediators of uPA-accelerated atherosclerosis.  These studies identified S100A8 and S100A9 mRNA as the most highly upregulated transcripts in uPA-overexpressing macrophages; upregulation of S100A9 protein in uPA-overexpressing macrophages was confirmed by Western blotting.  S100A8/A9, which are atherogenic in mice and are expressed in human atherosclerotic plaques, are also upregulated in aortae of mice with uPA-overexpressing macrophages, and macrophage S100A9 mRNA is upregulated by exposure of wild-type macrophages to medium from uPA-overexpressing macrophages.  Bioinformatics analysis of the microarray data suggest significant effects of uPA overexpression on cell migration and cell-matrix interactions.  Our results confirm—in a second animal model—that macrophage-expressed uPA stimulates atherosclerosis and aortic dilation.  They also implicate specific pathways in uPA/Plg-accelerated atherosclerosis and aneurysmal disease.

DESIGN
Six independent biological replicate RNA samples were prepared from thioglycollate-elicited peritoneal macrophages from mice of two different genotypes: SR-uPA+/0 transgenic (overexpress uPA in macrophages) and nontransgenic, respectively), for a total of 12 independent RNA samples.  Both transgenic and nontransgenic mice were Apoe-/- and were fed Western diet from 5-15 weeks before peritoneal macrophages were elicited.  In addition, from the six samples of each genotype, a pooled sample was prepared by combining the six genotype-specific samples.  Each of the two pooled samples was assayed on the BeadChip in two technical replicates, for a total of 16 hybridizations performed using two Illumina Mouse Ref-8 v1.1 chips.

