TITLE
Maternal inhalation of surface-coated nano-sized titanium dioxide (UV-Titan): Effects in prenatally exposed offspring on hepatic DNA damage and gene expression

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
In the present study we investigate the effect of maternal pulmonary exposure to titanium dioxide (UV-Titan designed for use in the paint and lacquer industry) on prenatally exposed offspring. Time-mated mice (C57BL/6BomTac) were exposed by inhalation for 1 h/day to 42 mg UV-titan/m3 aerosolized powder or filtered air during gestation days (GD) 8-18. We evaluated levels of DNA strand breaks using the comet assay in bronchioalveolar lavage (BAL) cells and liver cells of the time-mated mice, and in liver cells of the offspring. In parallel, we analyzed changes in gene expression in the liver tissue of offspring using DNA microarrays. We demonstrate that UV-Titan did not induce DNA strand breaks in the time-mated mice or their offspring. Transcriptional profiling of newborn liver tissue revealed changes in the expression of genes related to the retinoic acid (RA) signalling pathway in the females, while gene expression in male offspring was relatively unaffected by exposure.

DESIGN
Time-mated, nulliparous mice (C57BL/6BomTac, Taconic Europe, Ejby, Denmark) were exposed to filtered clean air or approximately 42 mg/m3 UV-Titan on GD 8–18 for 1 hr/day by a whole-body exposure.Delivery was expected on GD 20, and designated postnatal day (PND) 0. On PND 2, one offspring (“newborn”) per litter was killed by decapitation, to yield litters with at least 5 offspring per exposure group. The newborn offspring were collected two days after birth. On PND 23-24 (“at weaning”) one male and one female per litter were killed. Organs were dissected, weighed, placed in NUNC cryotubes, snap frozen in liquid N2 and stored at -80°C until analysis. Exposed dams were killed on PND 24-25 (26-27 days after last exposure). DNA strad break detection was carried out in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in dams by COMET assay. Total RNA was extracted from offspring livers and gene expression profiling was carried out on whole liver tissues from offspring. 9 UV-Titan treated and 7 controls mice consisting of 8 males and 8 females mRNA, hepatic, developmental, Toxicogenomics, nano-titanium dioxide

