TITLE
Microarray Profile of Measles Virus Nucleocapsid Protein (MVNP) Regulated Gene Expression in RANKL and M-CSF stimulated normal human bone marrow derived non-adherent cells.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Paget’s disease of bone (PDB) is a chronic focal skeletal disorder that affects 2-3% of the population over the age of 60. PDB is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with genetic heterogeneity.  SQSTM1/p62 UBA domain mutation (p62P392L) is widely identified in PDB and has been shown to increase osteoclastogenesis. Further, environmental factors such as paramyxovirus are implicated in PDB and MVNP has been shown to induce Pagetic phenotype in osteoclasts. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying p62P392L and MVNP stimulation of osteoclast differentiation in PDB are unclear. We therefore determined MVNP regulated gene expression profiling during osteoclast differentiation. We identified 8.4% of genes were upregulated ( > 4-fold) in MVNP transduced cells.  MVNP increased integrin β3 (63 fold), NFAT activating protein (6.5 fold), OSCAR (5.5 fold), TRAF5 (8.5 fold) mRNA expression compared to empty vector (EV) transduced cells. MVNP also elevated gene expression of cytokines/growth factors such as IL-17 (18 fold), IL-1F7 (10 fold), IL-17R (4.5 fold) and IL-11 (7 fold).   Interestingly, MVNP transduced cells demonstrated high level expression of signal regulatory protein beta 1 (SIRPβ1) (353 fold).  SIRPβ1 has been shown to interact with DAP 12, an ITAM containing adaptor protein which plays an important role in osteoclast differentiation.  Real-time PCR analysis of total RNA isolated from normal human peripheral blood monocytes transduced with MVNP confirmed upregulation of SIRPβ1 mRNA expression in the absence of RANKL stimulation. In contrast, RANKL stimulation did not alter SIRPβ1 expression in these cells. Furthermore, bone marrow mononuclear cells derived from patients with PDB showed high levels of SIRPβ1 mRNA expression compared to normal subjects.  Thus, MVNP regulated gene expression profiling during osteoclast differentiation provides new insights into molecular mechanisms and therapeutic targets to control elevated osteoclast activity in PDB.

DESIGN
Total RNA isolated from normal human bone marrow mononuclear cells transduced with EV, MVNP retroviral expression vectors and stimulated with M-CSF and RANKL for 48 h were subjected to Agilent microarray (~26,000 genes) analysis. One replicate per treatment was hybridized.

PLATFORM
GPL13497 Agilent-026652 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K v2 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

