TITLE
Fibrogenic and redox-related but not proinflammatory genes are upregulated in lewis rat model of chronic silicosis

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Silicosis, a fibrotic granulomatous lung disease, may occur through accidental high-dose or occupational inhalation of silica, leading to acute/accelerated and chronic silicosis, respectively. While chronic silicosis has a long asymptomatic latency, lung inflammation and apoptosis are hallmarks of acute silicosis. In animal models, histiocytic granulomas develop within days after high-dose intratracheal silica instillation. However, following chronic inhalation of occupationally relevant doses of silica, discrete granulomas resembling human silicosis arise months after the final exposure without significant lung inflammation/apoptosis. To identify molecular events associated with chronic silicosis, lung RNAs from controls or chronically silica-exposed rats were analyzed by Affymetrix at 28 wk after silica exposures. Results suggested a significant upregulation of 144 genes and downregulation of seven genes. The upregulated genes included complement cascade, chemokines/chemokine receptors, G-protein signaling components, metalloproteases, and genes associated with oxidative stress. To examine the kinetics of gene expression relevant to silicosis, qPCR, ELISA, Luminex-bead assays, Western blotting, and/or zymography were performed on lung tissues from 4 d, 28 wk, and intermediate times after chronic silica exposure and compared with 14 d acute silicosis samples. Results indicated that genes regulating fibrosis (secreted phosphoprotein-1, CCL2, and CCL7), redox enzymes (superoxide dismutase-2 and arginase-1), and the enzymatic activities of matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9 were upregulated in acute and chronic silicosis; however, proinflammatory cytokines were strongly upregulated only in acute silicosis. Thus, inflammatory cytokines are associated with acute but not chronic silicosis; however, genes regulating fibrosis, oxidative stress, and metalloproteases may contribute to both acute and chronic silicosis.

DESIGN
3 rats were chronically exposed to silica by inhalation. Briefly, exposure chambers were maintained with an airflow rate of ~15 cfm and temperature range of 22–26°C. Animals were exposed to 6.2 mg/m3 aerosolized silica (Min-U-Sil 5; U.S. Silica, Mill Creek, OK) with an average particle size of 1.75 ± 0.05 mm (mass median aerodynamic diameter) 6 h/d, 5 d/wk (Monday–Friday) for 6 wk. 3 control animals received filtered air under similar inhalation conditions.

PLATFORM
GPL1355 [Rat230_2] Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21830856

