TITLE
Cervical carcinoma-associated fibroblasts are DNA diploid and do not show evidence for somatic genetic alterations

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) have been recognized as important contributors to cancer development and progression. However, opposing evidence has been published whether CAFs, in addition to epigenetic, also undergo somatic genetic alterations and whether these changes contribute to carcinogenesis and tumour progression. We combined multiparameter DNA flow cytometry, flow-sorting and 6K SNP-arrays to study DNA aneuploidy, % S-phase, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and copy number alterations (CNAs) to study somatic genetic alterations in cervical cancer-associated stromal cell fractions (n = 58) from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples. Tissue sections were examined for the presence of CAFs. Microsatellite analysis was used to study LOH. By flow cytometry we found no proof for DNA aneuploidy in the vimentin-positive stromal cell fractions of any samples (CV G0G1 population 3.7% +/- 1.2; S-phase 1.4% +/- 1.8). The genotype concordance between the stromal cells and the paired normal endometrium samples was > 99.9%. No evidence for CNAs or LOH was found in the stromal cell fractions. In contrast, high frequencies of DNA content abnormalities (43/57), a significant higher S-phase (14.6% +/- 8.5)(p = 0.0001) and substantial numbers of CNAs and LOH were identified in the keratin-positive epithelial cell fractions (CV G0G1 population 4.1% +/- 1.0). Smooth muscle actin and vimentin immunohistochemistry verified the presence of CAFs in all cases tested. LOH hot-spots on chromosomes 3p, 4p and 6p were confirmed by microsatellite analysis but the stromal cell fractions showed retention of heterozygosity only. From our study we conclude that stromal cell fractions from cervical carcinomas are DNA diploid, have a genotype undistinguishable from patient-matched normal tissue and are genetically stable. Stromal genetic changes do not seem to play a role during cervical carcinogenesis and progression. In addition, the stromal cell fraction of cervical carcinomas can be used as reference allowing large retrospective studies of archival FFPE tissues for which no normal reference tissue is available.

DESIGN
Paired experiment, Endometrial (non-tumor) cells vs stromal cells from cervical tumors. Biological replicates: 58 patients. From 5 tumors also the tumor fraction was profiled.

