TITLE
Profiling of visceral sensory neurons in dorsal root and nodose ganglia in BALB/c mice.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Vagal afferent neurons are thought to convey primarily physiological information, whereas spinal afferents transmit noxious signals from the viscera to the central  nervous system. In order to elucidate molecular identities for these different  properties, we compared gene expression profiles of neurons located in nodose  ganglia (NG) and dorsal root ganglia (DRG) in mice. Intraperitoneal administration of  Alexa Fluor-488 conjugated Cholera toxin B allowed identification of neurons  projecting to the viscera. Fluorescent neurons in DRG (from T10 to T13) and NG  were isolated using laser capture microdissection. Gene expression profiles of visceral  afferent neurons, obtained by microarray hybridization, were analysed using  multivariate spectral map analysis, SAM algorithm (Significance Analysis of  Microarray data) and fold-difference filtering. A total of 1996 genes were found to be  differentially expressed in DRG versus NG, including 41 G-protein coupled receptors  and 60 ion channels. Expression profiles obtained on laser-captured neurons were  contrasted to those obtained on whole ganglia demonstrating striking differences and  the need for microdissection when studying visceral sensory neurons because of  dilution of the signal by somatic sensory neurons. Furthermore, a detailed catalogue  of all adrenergic and cholinergic, GABA, glutamate, serotonin and dopamine  receptors, voltage-gated potassium, sodium and calcium channels and transient  receptor potential cation channels present in visceral afferents is provided. Our  genome-wide expression profiling data provide novel insight into molecular  signatures that underlie both functional differences and similarities between NG and  DRG visceral sensory neurons. Moreover, these findings will offer novel insight into  mode of action of pharmacologic agents modulating visceral sensation. Keywords: Cell type comparison

DESIGN
Three separate experiments were performed. First, 5 whole dorsal root ganglia were compared to 7 whole nodose ganglia. Second, Laser captured visceral neurons derived from 5 dorsal root ganglia and 5 nodose ganglia were compared on MG-U74Av2. Third, Laser captured visceral neurons derived from 9 dorsal root ganglia and 11 nodose ganglia were compared on Mouse430_2.

PLATFORM
GPL81 [MG_U74Av2] Affymetrix Murine Genome U74A Version 2 Array GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
16303873

