TITLE
Regional organization of gene expression in Streptomyces coelicolor

ORGANISM
Streptomyces coelicolor

SUMMARY
Based on the chromosomal locations of genes inferred from sequence analysis to be essential for the viability of Streptomyces coelicolor, Bentley et al. (Bentley et al., 2002) have suggested that a 4.9 Mb central region of the linear S. coelicolor chromosome encodes core functions expressed during vegetative growth of this species, while 1.5 Mb and 2.3 Mb  chromosomal DNA segments lateral to this core encode auxiliary functions proposed to be required under other growth conditions.  To examine this hypothesis and experimentally identify genes expressed during vegetative growth of S. coelicolor cultures, we used DNA microarrays to measure globally the abundance of S. coelicolor transcripts in cells growing in liquid medium.  We found that, overall, genes corresponding to the 4.9 Mb core region of the S. coelicolor M145 chromosome were more highly expressed under non-limiting growth conditions than genes in the 1.5 Mb left and 2.3 Mb right chromosome arms, supporting the notion of the core versus auxiliary organization of genes on the chromosome.  To examine how this chromosomal distribution of transcripts changes under other growth conditions, we also measured gene expression changes during stationary phase and several stress conditions.  During stationary phase, the composition of S. coelicolor transcripts appears to shift from large quantities of growth-related transcripts encoded in the core region to those of less characterized genes, which may be essential for differentiation and other physiological responses, encoded throughout the chromosome.  After temperature and osmotic upshifts, we found that S. coelicolor transiently induces a set of several hundred genes located throughout the chromosome, which may function in response mechanisms common to the two stress conditions. Keywords: all_pairs

DESIGN
An all pairs experiment design type is where all labeled extracts are compared to every other labeled extract.

PLATFORM
GPL2619 ScoKao_02-08-14 GPL2620 ScoKao_03-05-20

CITATIONS
15936160

