TITLE
Gene expression profile of cancer cells and macrophages growing as a co-culture

ORGANISM
Canis lupus familiaris

SUMMARY
Molecular mechanisms of the cancer cells-macrophages interactions growing in vitro conditions as a co-culture. The five canine mammary cancer cell lines were cultured with monocytes sorted from the canine blood for 72hrs. Then, the cancer cells and macrophages were sorted and the gene expression analysis was conducted. The control for each co-cultured cell line was the same cell line growing as a single culture, whereas the control for the macrophages growing in a co-culture conditions were macrophages growing as a single culture. Solid tumors are comprised of various cells, like cancer cells, resident stromal cells, migratory hemopoietic cells and so on. These cells regulate tumor growth and metastasis. Macrophages are probably the most important element of the interactions within the tumor microenvironment. However, the molecular mechanism how the tumor environment can educate tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) toward a tumor-promoting phenotype still remains unknown. Moreover, there are no information how the presence of macrophages change the cancer cells phenotype. Exploring the underlying molecular mechanisms of these phenomena was the aim of this study.  Solid tumors are comprised of various cells, like cancer cells, resident stromal cells, migratory hemopoietic cells and so on. These cells regulate tumor growth and metastasis. Macrophages are probably the most important element of the interactions within the tumor microenvironment. However, the molecular mechanism how the tumor environment can educate tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) toward a tumor-promoting phenotype still remains unknown. Moreover, there are no information how the presence of macrophages change the cancer cells phenotype. Exploring the underlying molecular mechanisms of these phenomena was the aim of this study.

DESIGN
Dye-swap experiment, each cell line growing in the co-culture conditions was compared to the same cell line growing as a single culture, macrophages growing in the co-culture conditions were compared to the macrophages growing as the single culture.

PLATFORM
GPL13605 Agilent-021193 Canine (V2) Gene Expression Microarray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

