TITLE
Benign Breast Cores from Healthy Women Treated with Tamoxifen or Placebo

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Five years of tamoxifen reduces breast cancer risk by nearly 50% but is associated with significant side-effects and toxicities.  A better understanding of the direct and indirect effects of tamoxifen in benign breast tissue could elucidate new mechanisms of breast carcinogenesis, suggest novel chemoprevention targets, and provide relevant early response biomarkers for Phase II prevention trials.  Seventy-three women at increased risk for breast cancer were randomized to tamoxifen (20 mg daily) or placebo for three months. Blood and breast tissue samples were collected at baseline and post-treatment.  Sixty-nine women completed all study activities (37 tamoxifen and 32 placebo).  The selected biomarkers focused on estradiol and IGFs in the blood, DNA methylation and cytology in random periareolar fine needle aspirates, and tissue morphometry, proliferation, apoptosis, and gene expression (microarray and RT-PCR) in the tissue core samples. Tamoxifen downregulated ets-oncogene family members ETV4 and ETV5 and reduced breast epithelial cell proliferation independent of CYP2D6 genotypes or effects on estradiol, ESR1 or IGFs.  Reduction in proliferation was correlated with downregulation of ETV4 and DNAJC12. Tamoxifen also modulated expression of RAB GTPases, and several genes involved in epithelial-stromal interaction, and reduced tumor suppressor gene methylation. Three months of tamoxifen did not affect breast tissue composition, cytological atypia, preneoplasia or apoptosis. Tamoxifen may durably reduce breast cancer risk through downregulation of ETV4 and ETV5 which could deplete mammary progenitor populations.    This pathway has the potential to provide novel targets and early response biomarkers for phase II prevention trials.

DESIGN
Randomized prospective double blinded placebo-controlled trial of tamoxifen (20 mg daily) versus placeo in women at increased risk for breast cancer. Gene expression was assessed in whole breast tissue cores obtained at baseline and after three months of treatment for 35 women. Core biopsies were obtained in the late luteal phase (day 28 +/- 2) for premenopausal women (N = 19). Breast lobules from the baseline and post-treatment cores were microdissected for 5 tamoxifen subjects.

PLATFORM
GPL13376 Illumina HumanWG-6 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
21778330

