TITLE
Gene Expression of Fathead Minnow Exposed to Primary and Secondary Treated Effluents

ORGANISM
Pimephales promelas

SUMMARY
Contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) in treated municipal effluents have the potential to adversely impact exposed organisms prompting elevated public concern.  Using transcriptomic tools, we investigated changes in gene expression and cellular pathways in the liver of male fathead minnows (Pimephales promelas) exposed to 5% concentrations of full secondary-treated (HTP) or advanced primary-treated (PL) municipal wastewater effluents containing CECs.  Gene expression changes were associated with apical endpoints (plasma vitellogenin and changes in secondary sexual characteristics).  Of 32 effluent CECs analyzed, 28 were detected including pharmaceuticals, personal care products, hormones, and industrial compounds. Transcript patterns differed between effluents, however < 10% of these had agreement in the detected response (e.g. transcrips involved in xenobiotic detoxification, oxidative stress and apoptosis) in both effluents. Exposure to PL effluent caused changes in transcript levels of genes involved in metabolic pathways (e.g., lipid transport and steroid metabolism).  Exposure to HTP effluent affected transcripts involved in signaling pathways (e.g., focal adhesion assembly and extracellular matrix).  Exposure to both effluents produced significantly higher levels of plasma VTG and changes in secondary sexual characteristics (e.g., ovipositor development).  Taken together the results suggest, a potential association between some transcriptomic changes and higher biological responses following effluent exposure; and a potential adverse outcome pathway following exposure to complex chemical mixtures containing CECs -.  Furthermore, this study identified responses in key genes and pathways not previously implicated in exposure to CECS, , which could be consistent with effluent exposure (e.g., oxidative stress) in addition to other pathway responses specific to the effluent type. This may be useful for assessing the adverse health effects of fish by effluents exposure to CECs.

DESIGN
To investigate gene expression responses resulting from exposure to POTW effluents, two laboratory experiments were conducted using effluent from San Diego (Point Loma; SD (PL)) and Los Angeles (Hyperion; LA (HTP)).  The LA effluent received secondary treatment and the SD effluent received advanced primary treatment.   Treatments used during exposures consisted of negative controls (moderately hard water), positive controls (E2), and 0.5% and 5% effluent concentrations.  The 0.5% concentration of effluent represented an environmentally realistic exposure level.  The 5% effluent concentration represented a higher level at which we expected biological responses.  The exposures lasted 14 days and had 3 replicates per treatment.

PLATFORM
GPL9248 Agilent-019597 FHM_Denslow_8x15K [Feature Number version]

CITATIONS
23919544

