TITLE
Global gene expression of chemical carcinogen (N-methyl-N-nitrosourea), Helicobacter pylori infection, and high-salt diet-treated mouse gastric mucosa

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection and excessive salt intake are known as important risk factors for stomach cancer in humans. However, interactions of these two factors with gene expression profiles during gastric carcinogenesis remain unclear. In this study, we established a mouse gastric tumor model combining a chemical carcinogen, H. pylori infection and a high-salt diet. The tumor incidence and multiplicity in N-methyl-N-nitrosourea-treated mice were significantly increased by combination of H. pylori with a high-salt diet. In addition, detailed examination indicated that excessive salt could regulate progression of gastric tumor. Global gene expression profiles in glandular stomach of the mouse model were investigated by cDNA microarray analysis, and 36 and 31 more than twofold up-regulated and down-regulated genes, respectively, were detected in the H. pylori-infection and high-salt diet combined group compared with the other groups. Quantitative RT-PCR confirmed significant over-expression of several candidate genes including Cd177, Reg3g, and Muc13. These results suggest that our mouse model combined with H. pylori infection and high-salt diet is useful for gene expression profiling in gastric carcinogenesis.

DESIGN
Five- to six-week-old male C57BL/6J mice (CLEA Japan, Tokyo, Japan) were inoculated with Helicobacter pylori (Sydney strain 1) (Sample No. 2 and 4) or Brucella broth (Sample No. 1 and 3). The animals were administered 120 ppm N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU) in their drinking water on alternate weeks (total exposure, 5 weeks). Mice were given basal diet (CE-2, CLEA Japan) (Sample No. 1 and 2) or high-salt diet containing 10% NaCl (Sample No. 3 and 4). At 40 weeks, the animals were subjected to deep anesthesia and laparotomy with excision of the stomach.

PLATFORM
GPL2897 GE Healthcare/Amersham Biosciences CodeLink™   Mouse Whole Genome Bioarray

CITATIONS
23899160

