TITLE
Transcriptional responses to NNK and selenocystine in mouse lungs.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
This study evaluated transcriptional effects of the lung carcinogen NNK ( 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone) injection and selenocystine consumption on the murine lung. Female A/J mice at 5 weeks of age were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory. Animals were stabilized on an unsupplemented AIN-76 diet for one week prior to being given the selenium supplemented diet. The basal level of selenium in the diet is 0.35 ppm Se, the selenocytine supplemention was at 15 ppm. NNK was administered i.p. as a single 10 uM injection in 0.2 mL saline. With this protocol, 100% of animals reproducibly develop lung tumors after 3 months. Three days after NNK administration, animals were provided AIN-76A diets supplemented with selenocystine at 15 ppm selenium ad libitum for 10 days. Animals were sacrificed thirteen days after NNK administration. Lung tissue was harvested, immediately homogenized in Trizol and frozen. The organic extracted RNAs were run over Qiagen RNeasy columes before quantifying and qualifying them. All samples had RNA quality index's greater than 9.

DESIGN
Four groups of A/J mice were utilized with 4 biological replicates per group. 1) Untreated - controls on the AIN-76 diet (0.35 ppm Se). 2) NNK treated - single injection of NNK, maintained on norma AIN-76 diet, sacraficed after 13 days. 3) SECY - selenocystine supplemented (15 ppm) for 10 days on a AIN-76 diet then sacraficed. 4) NNK plus SECY - single injection of NNK, after 3 days, selenocystine supplemented (15 ppm) diet for 10 days then sacraficed. RNAs from the the four untreated mice were combined to phenotypically anchor the dual color expression profile. mouse lung responses to NNK injection and/or selenocystine dietary supplementation

PLATFORM
GPL2872 Agilent-012694 Whole Mouse Genome G4122A (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

