TITLE
Mouse hypothalamus and whole brain: control vs. sodium craving

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Sodium appetite is an instinct that involves avid specific intention. It is elicited by sodium deficiency, stress-evoked ACTH and by reproduction. Genome-wide microarrays in sodium deficient mice, or following ACTH infusion, showed upregulation of hypothalamic genes, including DARPP-32, dopamine receptors-1 and  -2, alpha-2C-adrenoceptor, and STEP. Both DARPP-32 and neural plasticity regulator, ARC were upregulated in lateral hypothalamic orexinergic neurons by sodium deficiency. Administration of dopamine D1- (SCH23390) and D2-receptor (raclopride) antagonists  reduced gratification of sodium appetite triggered by sodium  deficiency. SCH23390 was specific, having no effect on  osmotic-induced water drinking, whereas raclopride also reduced  water intake. D1-receptor knockout mice had normal sodium appetite, indicating compensatory regulation. It was  insensitive to SCH23390, confirming the absence of off-target effects. Bilateral microinjection of SCH23390 (100nM in 200nL) into rats? lateral hypothalamus greatly reduced sodium appetite. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis  in  hypothalami of mice with sodium appetite showed significant enrichment of gene sets previously linked to addiction (opiates, cocaine). This finding of concerted gene regulation was attenuated upon gratification with perplexingly rapid kinetics of only 10 minutes, anteceding significant absorption of salt from the gut.  Salt appetite and hedonic liking of salt taste have evolved over more than  a  hundred million years e.g. being present in Metatheria. Drugs causing pleasure and addiction are comparatively recent and likely reflect usurping of evolutionary ancient systems with high survival value by the gratification of contemporary hedonic indulgences.  Our findings outline a novel molecular logic for instinctive behavior encoded by the brain with  possible  important translational-medical implications.

