TITLE
Transcriptional analysis of Schistosoma mansoni treated with sub-lethal doses of the anthelmintic drug praziquantel

ORGANISM
Schistosoma mansoni

SUMMARY
Schistosoma mansoni is one of the most common etiological agents responsible for the disease schistosomiasis. More than 200 million people suffer from this disease making it the most severe tropical disease after malaria in terms of morbidity. Praziquantel (PZQ) is the treatment of choice for schistosomiasis and has been used almost exclusively to treat the disease since the 1970s. However, while the drug is lethal for sexually mature schistosomes, it is ineffective against juveniles. Thus, while morbidity can be eased, a cure is difficult to achieve. As a result there is an urgent need to develop a new generation of anti-schistosomal drugs, a task that will be made easier by understanding the mechanism of action of PZQ. As yet, neither the molecule to which PZQ binds nor the means by which it kills mature schistosomes is known. The overarching aim of this study was to understand the molecular basis of PZQ sensitivity in S. mansoni. We believe that juvenile worms survive PZQ treatment in vivo due to the induction of, as yet, unidentified protective molecular pathways. To address this hypothesis juvenile and adult PR1 S. mansoni were treated in vitro with sub-lethal concentrations of PZQ. mRNA was extracted from replicate samples, cRNA prepagreen and labeled with cyanine dyes for analysis using a 44K S. mansoni microarray. The data was then analyzed using Genespring. Our findings suggest that a number of genes associated with drug transport, iron homeostasis and apoptosis are induced in juvenile but not adult schistosomes and that this allows the juvenile worms to protect themselves against the lethal effects of PZQ long enough for the drug to be metabolized by the human host.

DESIGN
42 days post exposure (DPE) male schistosomes were exposed to 0 and 1 µg/mL praziquantel (PZQ) for 1 or 20 h and 10 µg/mL PZQ for 1 h.  42 DPE female schistosomes were exposed to 0, 1 and 10 µg/mL PZQ for 20 h.  28 DPE mixed-sex schistosomes were exposed to 0, 1 and 10 µg/mL PZQ for 1 and 20 h.  All experiments were performed in biological triplicates.  The 0 µg/mL PZQ exposures were used as controls to the appropriate groups and a universal reference was used in all experiments that was comprised of RNA derived from 100 mixed sex, unexposed 42 DPE schistosomes spiked with 0.5 % (v/v) RNA isolated from 42 DPE mixed sex worms exposed to 10 µg/mL PZQ, 0.5 % (v/v) RNA isolated from 28 DPE worms exposed to 10 µg/mL PZQ and 0.5 % (v/v) RNA isolated from 28 DPE worms unexposed to PZQ. Transcriptional response to praziquantel exposure by time and concentration

PLATFORM
GPL6936 Cunningham Schistosoma mansoni 22K v1.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

