TITLE
Expression profiling of human T-LL cell line CUTLL1

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Notch is normally activated by cleavage and nuclear translocation of its intracellular domain (ICN1), which turns on downstream target genes. Human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), an aggressive immature T cell malignancy, is associated with Notch 1 gain-of-function mutations in more than 50% of the cases. Efforts to date to identify direct Notch1 targets have been confounded by the lack of a method to turn Notch1 on in a controlled fashion in T-ALL cells that are poised to respond to Notch signals. Of note, because Notch signaling activates transcriptional repressors that feedback to dampen the expression of many target genes (a process referred to as incoherent logic), it is likely that many direct targets are missed in Notch off analyses, which are further complicated by an inability to identify direct targets in a clear-cut fashion. We have overcome this limitation by developing a GSI washout method that results in the rapid translocation of activated Notch1 to the nucleus. We intend to use this method to study the assembly and loading of transcriptional complexes onto downstream targets, the kinetics of target activation. To date, our efforts have been devoted to comparing the gene expression signature of Notch-on and Notch-off in the human T-ALL cell line CUTLL. In addition to previously identified Notch1 target genes, we have also identified a series of novel genes upregulated by GSI washout in the presence of cycloheximide, suggesting that they are likely to be direct targets. Additional controls included transduction of cells with dominant negative MAML1, a specific antagonist of canonical Notch1 signaling, prior to Notch1 reactivation, and a mock GSI  washout to control for cycloheximide effects.

DESIGN
CUTLL1 cells are cultured in triplicates with different treatments. Total RNA was prepared and hybridized to Affymetrix human U133 plus 2.0 microarrays

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21737748

