TITLE
Polymicrobial periodontal pathogens transcriptomes in calvarial bone and soft tissue

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The objectives of this investigation were to examine changes in the host transcriptional profiles during a polymicrobial periodontal pathogens Porphyromonas gingivalis, Treponema denticola, and Tannerella forsythia infection using a murine calvarial model of inflammation and bone resorption.  P. gingivalis FDC 381, T. denticola ATCC 35404, and T. forsythia ATCC 43037 was injected into the subcutaneous soft tissue over the calvaria of BALB/c mice for 3 days, after which the soft tissues and calvarial bones were excised.  RNA was isolated from infected soft tissues and calvarial bones and analyzed for transcript profiles using Murine GeneChip® MG-MOE430A Affymetrix arrays to provide a molecular profile of the events that occur following infection of these tissues. We used mouse microarrays to detail the molecular profile of the events that occur following infection of calvarial and bone tissues and identified distinct classes of up- and down-regulated genes during this process.

DESIGN
P. gingivalis/T. denticola/T. forsythia was injected at 5 x 108 each (N = 10) into the soft tissues overlying the calvaria of the mice for 3 days. A control group (N = 9) was injected with vehicle once daily for 3 days. Mice were euthanized 8 h after the last injection.  The calvarial bones and overlying soft tissues from 5 mice in each group were excised, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at –80°C until RNA isolation. Total RNA was isolated from the frozen calvarial tissue and calvarial bone from each mouse (Polymicrobial bacteria infected and control animals, N = 5 in each group) with Trizol reagent (Invitrogen, CA).  Equal amounts of RNA from samples were labeled and hybridized on a mouse GeneChip following the protocol described in the GeneChip Expression Analysis Technical manual (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). After hybridization, the GeneChip arrays were stained and scanned in an Affymetrix GCS 3000 7G Scanner.

PLATFORM
GPL339 [MOE430A] Affymetrix Mouse Expression 430A Array

CITATIONS
21896157

