TITLE
Two transcription factors are necessary for iron homeostasis in a salt-dwelling archaeon [gene expression data]

ORGANISM
Halobacterium salinarum NRC-1

SUMMARY
Because iron toxicity and deficiency are equally life threatening, maintaining intracellular iron levels within a narrow optimal range is critical for nearly all known organisms. However, regulatory mechanisms that establish homeostasis are not well understood in organisms that dwell in environments at the extremes of pH, temperature, and salinity. Under conditions of limited iron, the extremophile Halobacterium salinarum, a salt-loving archaeon, mounts a specific response to scavenge iron for growth.  We have identified and characterized the role of two transcription factors (TFs), Idr1 and Idr2, in regulating this important response. An integrated systems analysis of TF knockout gene expression profiles and genome-wide binding locations in the presence and absence of iron has revealed that these TFs operate collaboratively to maintain iron homeostasis.  In the presence of iron, Idr1 and Idr2 bind near each other at 24 loci in the genome, where they are both required to repress some genes. In contrast, Idr1 and Idr2 are both necessary to activate other genes in a putative a feed forward loop. Even at loci bound independently, the two TFs target different genes with similar functions in iron homeostasis.  We discuss conserved and unique features of the Idr1-Idr2 system in the context of similar systems in organisms from other domains of life. Data in this GEO archive are linked to the publication: Schmid AK, Pan M, Sharma K, Baliga NS.2011. Two transcription factors are necessary for iron homeostasis in a salt-dwelling archaeon.Nucleic Acids Res.39(7):2519-33.

DESIGN
The Δura3 parent, Δidr2 and Δidr1, and Δ idr1Δidr2 mutant strains were grown to mid-logarithmic phase (OD600 ~0.4 – 0.8) in CDM with all trace metals except iron. Cultures were split in half and FeSO4 was added to one half, while the other was continued under iron limitation. 8-mL samples were collected from each culture every 20 minutes for 60 minutes (see also experimental design, Supplementary Figure 1, Schmid et al., 2011). RNA from two biological replicate time courses were prepared, averages of these replicates are reported in the published study, whereas data from each replicate are reported here. The zero time point was harvested immediately before the addition of iron. Each Sample is based on two arrrays (one with dye-swap).

PLATFORM
GPL13682 ISB Halobacterium Spotted Microarray [gene-centered version]

CITATIONS
19536205

