TITLE
The landscape of promoter DNA hypomethylation in liver cancer (expression data)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Extensive loss of DNA methylation is a hallmark of cancer. The role of hypomethylation in altering gene expression in cancer cells has been poorly understood. Hepatic cellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common human cancers. We use HCC as a model to investigate hypomethylation in cancer by a combination of methylated DNA immunoprecipitation and hybridization with comprehensive promoter arrays. We identify approximately 2,800 promoters that are hypomethylated in tumor samples. The hypomethylated promoters appear in clusters across the genome suggesting a high-level organization behind the epigenomic changes in cancer. The genes whose promoters are demethylated are mainly involved in cell growth, cell adhesion and communication, signal transduction, mobility and invasion; functions that are essential for cancer progression and metastasis. Previous studies suggested that MBD2 was involved in demethylation of uPA and MMP2 genes in human breast and prostate cancer cell lines. We extend these results here showing that whereas MBD2 depletion in normal liver cells has little or no effect, its depletion in the human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2 and the adenocarcinoma cell line SkHep1 results in suppression of cell growth, anchorage-independent growth and invasiveness, as well as an increase in promoter methylation and silencing of several of the genes that are hypomethylated in tumors. Our studies establish for the first time the rules governing hypomethylation of promoters in liver cancer and define the potential functional role of hypomethylation in cancer.

DESIGN
Cancerous and normal adjacent tissue samples were obtained from 11 patients with HCC from the Chinese National Human Genome Center at Shanghai, China (Dr. Ze-Guang Han). For three patients, the cancer samples were dissected using the laser capture microdissection technique. Gene expression profiles for these patients were generated using Affymetrix expression microarrays.

