TITLE
qRT-PCR on Francisella tularensis LVS and ShuS4 strain during macrophage infection

ORGANISM
Francisella tularensis

SUMMARY
Francisella tularensis is one of three bacterial species designated as a Category A select agent by the Centre for Disease Control (CDC), a category indicating agents most likely to be employed as a biological weapon. F. tularensis can be divided into four different subspecies, and it is well known that the type, severity and duration of the disease can differ substantially depending on what subspecies is responsible for the infection. Of the four subspecies, subsp. tularensis (Type A) and subsp. holartica (Type B) are of primary clinical significance, and account for nearly all recorded incidences of the disease in humans. Though Type A is considered to be more virulent than Type B, recent reports have shown that Type A can be further sub-divided into two genetically distinct populations, termed A.I and A.II, which differ with respect to geographical location, disease outcome and source of recovered isolates. Of these two subpopulations, clinical data suggests that Type A.I strains are significantly more virulent than Type A.II, and Type A.II strains appear to have a disease outcome similar to infections with Type B. During natural infections, host mononuclear phagocytes appear to be the primary target of all F. tularensis subsp. Despite the differences in disease outcome between different subspecies, the mechanisms involved in phagosomal escape, the modulation of phagosomal biogenesis, phagosomal disruption and bacterial egress appears to be indistinguishable between subspecies, at least at a physiological level. In collaboration with Dr. Patrick McGann at Walter Reed Army Institute of Research (WRAIR) we have been studying the differential gene expression of F. tularensis during macrophage infection. Dr. McGann provided the PFGRC with RNA samples from F. tularensis strains LVS and Shuh4 isolated from infected macrophages. Samples were interrogated using high throughput qRT-PCR using 1,067 primer pairs.

DESIGN
The study was a timecourse with 2 strains :LVS and Schu S4 and 4 time points: 0hours, 2hours, 4hours and 8hours. Samples were interrogated using high throughput qRT-PCR using 1,067 primer pairs designed from both strains. 0hours timepoints were done in duplicates, other time points in quadruplicates. Replicates were averages and then quantile normalized for each strain.

PLATFORM
GPL10974 Francisella tularensis full genome qRT-PCR

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

