TITLE
Functional and Transcriptomic Recovery of Infarcted Mouse Myocardium Treated with Bone Marrow Mononuclear Cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Although bone marrow-derived mononuclear cells (BMNC) have been extensively used in cell therapy for cardiac diseases, little mechanistic information is available to support reports of their efficacy. To address this shortcoming, we compared structural and functional recovery and associated global gene expression profiles in post-ischaemic myocardium treated with BMNC transplantation. BMNC suspensions were injected into cardiac scar tissue 10 days after experimental myocardial infarction. Six weeks later, mice undergoing BMNC therapy were found to have normalized antibody repertoire and improved cardiac performance measured by ECG, treadmill exercise time and echocardiography. After functional testing, gene expression profiles in cardiac tissue were evaluated using high-density oligonucleotide arrays. Expression of more than 18% of the 11981 quantified unigenes was significantly altered in the infarcted hearts. BMNC therapy restored expression of 2099 (96.2%) of the genes that were altered by infarction but led to altered expression of 286 other genes, considered to be a side effect of the treatment. Transcriptional therapeutic efficacy, a metric calculated using a formula that incorporates both recovery and side effect of treatment, was 73%. In conclusion, our results confirm a beneficial role for bone marrow-derived cell therapy and provide new information on molecular mechanisms operating after BMNC transplantation on post ischemic heart failure in mice.

DESIGN
We compared RNA samples extracted from whole hearts of infarcted mouse myocardium treated with bone marrow mononuclear cells control with untreated infarcted and control mice samples by analyzing hybridization to AECOM 32k mouse microarrays ( http://microarray1k.aecom.yu.edu/ ) spotted with Operon version 3.0 70-mer oligonucleotides. The hybridization protocol and the slide type were uniform throughout the entire experiment to minimize the technical noise. Treated, control (sham) and infarcted red-labeled heart samples were hybridized against an in-house prepared green-labeled universal mouse reference.

PLATFORM
GPL5371 AECOM 32K MOUSE OLIGONUCLEOTIDE ARRAY, MO2 printing series

CITATIONS
21671060

