TITLE
Transcriptional Differences between Normal and Glioma-Derived Glial Progenitor Cells Identify a Core Set of Dysregulated Genes.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Glial progenitor cells (GPCs) of the adult human white matter, which express gangliosides recognized by monoclonal antibody A2B5, are a potential source of glial tumors of the brain. We used A2B5-based sorting to extract progenitor-like cells from a range of human glial tumors, that included low-grade glioma, oligodendroglioma, oligo-astrocytomas, anaplastic astrocytoma, and glioblastoma multiforme. The A2B5+ tumor cells proved tumorigenic upon orthotopic xenograft, and the tumors generated reflected the phenotypes of those from which they derived. Expression profiling revealed that A2B5+ tumor progenitors expressed a cohort of genes by which they could be distinguished from A2B5+ GPCs isolated from normal adult white matter. Most of the genes differentially expressed by glioma-derived A2B5+ cells varied as a function of tumor stage; however, a small number were invariably expressed at all stages of gliomagenesis. These glioma progenitor-associated genes included CD24, SIX1 and EYA1, which were up-regulated at all stages of gliomagenesis, and MTUS1 and SPOCK3, which were down-regulated at all stages of tumor progression. qPCR and immunolabeling confirmed the differential expression of these genes in primary gliomas, while pathway analysis permitted their segregation into differentially active signaling pathways. By comparing the expression patterns of glial tumor progenitors to their identically-isolated normal homologues, we have identified a discrete set of oncogenic pathways by which glial tumorigenesis may be both better understood, and more efficiently targeted.

DESIGN
Samples originating from patients with matched disease and/or pathology were considered as replicates either on the basis of exact tumor phenotype, tumor grade, or tumor vs. normal tissue samples.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
23727239

