TITLE
Genomic profiles of mouse liver tissue harboring deletion of RB and/or p53, untreated or post-hepatocarcinogen treatment [CGH data]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The retinoblastoma (RB) and p53 tumor suppressors are critical regulators of the cell cycle with profound impact on both normal cell biology and disease etiology. In the context of human cancers, compound inactivation of RB and p53 is a frequent occurrence; however, the cooperation of these tumor suppressors in driving tumorigenesis has proven to be intricate and dependent on both the tissue and type of cancer. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a highly complex disease characterized by numerous molecular abnormalities (e.g. p53, RB, TGFβ) and chromosomal aberrations associated with environmental factors (e.g. Hepatitis B/C Virus, Aflatoxin B1). Despite extensive research, how each of these facets of disease development cooperates in promoting tumorigenesis is ultimately unknown.  In the current study, we present a mouse model of liver tumorigenesis, in which the impact of RB and p53 loss is modified by the tissue environment. While loss of RB and p53 promotes deregulation of transcriptional programs associated with advanced disease, these changes are not sufficient to drive spontaneous tumorigenesis in the liver. However, in response to carcinogen-induced damage, distinct and cooperative roles of RB and p53 are revealed, which critically impact cell cycle control, checkpoint response, genome stability, and ultimately tumor development.

DESIGN
Mice that are transgenic for Cre recombinase under the albumin promoter and harboring loxP sites within the Rb and/or p53 genes. For gene expression microarray analysis, mice were aged to 14 days, and treated for 24 hours with diethylnitrosamine (DEN) or saline as a control. For CGH analysis, mice were aged to 6 months post-DEN treatment. Liver tissue was obtained from dissected tumors and compared to normal liver tissue of 6-month old, saline-treated littermates. CGH analysis includes 5 individual tumor samples and 2 control samples (each consisting of a pool of 3 normal mouse liver DNA).

