TITLE
Global transgenerational gene expression dynamics in two nascent allohexaploid wheat lines analogous in genome constitution to common wheat (Triticum aestivum)

ORGANISM
Triticum aestivum ; Triticum turgidum subsp. durum ; Aegilops tauschii ; Triticum carthlicum

SUMMARY
Alteration in gene expression accompanying initial stages of allopolyploidy is a prominent feature in plants, but its spectrum and model are highly idiosyncratic. We used multi-colour GISH to identify individuals from two nascent allohexaploid wheat lines between Triticum turgidum and Aegilops tauschii, which had a transgenerationally stable chromosomal constitution mimicking that of common wheat.  We performed genomewide analysis of gene expression for these plants along with their parental species using the Affymetrix GeneChip Wheat Genome-Array.  Comparison with parental species coupled with inclusion of empirical mid-parent values (MPVs) revealed two patterns of alteration in gene expression in the allohexaploid lines: parental dominance expression and nonadditive expression.  Genes involved in each altered pattern could be classified into three distinct groups, stochastic, heritable and persistent, based on their transgenerational heritability and inter-line conservation.  Whereas both altered patterns of gene expression showed a propensity of inheritance, identity of the involved genes is stochastic, consistent with the involvement of diverse Gene Ontology (GO) terms.  Nonetheless, those genes showing nonadditive expression exhibited a significant enrichment for vesicle-function. Our results suggest global alteration in gene expression conditioned by nascent allopolyploidy likely play functional roles in stabilization and establishment of the newly formed plants, and consequential to evolution.

DESIGN
We used Affymetrix GeneChip Wheat Genome-Array to compare the expression difference of newly synthetic wheat allopolyploid lines and their parental lines.

PLATFORM
GPL3802 [wheat] Affymetrix Wheat Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

