TITLE
To understand which glycan-related genes are involved in the recognition, signaling, and binding of nutrients (HMOs)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Dr. Lebrilla's lab is working on another set of transcriptomics experiments which will measure whether HMO (human milk oligosacharides) elicit a differential response on Caco2 in the presence of B.infantis. They wish to supplement the data obtained with the Illumina platform with glycan-related expression data obtained with the Gene-chips to achieve a more complete understanding on how Caco2 cells respond to the presence of HMOs and B.infantis. The transcriptomics data is being complemented by qPCR based bacterial-epithelial cells binding assays, and glycan arrays assays for which they have initiated a collaboration with the CFG Core H (David Smith).

DESIGN
The influence, signaling and adhesion between Bifidobacterium infantis, a probiotic microorganism abundant in infant feces, and Caco2 epithelial cells. Our hypothesis is that HMOs act as signaling molecules for both Caco2 cells and B. infantis to indicate the presence in the gut, of a nutrient niche adapted for the nourishment and recruitment of HMO-consuming probiotic microorganism. HMOs therefore could play a role in the expression and binding to GBPs both on epithelial cells and in probiotic gut microorganisms. Preliminary transcriptomics data analysis obtained by using the Illumina Human Ref-8 Expression Bead Chip, has revealed that co-incubation of Caco2 cells with HMO upregulates genes belonging to chemokines, adhesion molecules, growth factors and glycan degradation, thus indicating that HMOs are actively recognized by these cells.  We are working on another set of transcriptomics experiments which will measure whether HMO elicit a differential response on Caco2 in the presence of B.infantis. We wish to supplement the data obtained with the Illumina platform with glycan-related expression data obtained with the Gene-chips to achieve a more complete understanding on how Caco2 cells respond to the presence of HMOs and B.infantis. The transcriptomics data is being complemented by qPCR based bacterial-epithelial cells binding assays, and glycan arrays assays for which we have initiated a collaboration with the CFG Core H (David Smith). We are requesting the analysis of 16 RNA samples from Caco2 cells on the Glyco-gene chips, for testing respectively 4 independent biological replicates for each of the 4 different co-incubation conditions. RNA preparations from Caco2 cells were sent to Microarray Core (E).  The RNA was amplified, labeled, and hybridized to GLYCO_v3 microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL11095 [GLYCOv3_Hs] Custom Affymetrix Glyco v3 GeneChip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

