TITLE
Deletion of the Mammalian INDY Homologue in Mice Mimics Aspects of Dietary Restriction and Protects Against Diet and Age-Induced Adiposity and Insulin Resistance

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Reduction in expression of the INDY gene in Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans prolongs life span, and in D. melanogaster augments mitochondrial biogenesis in a manner akin to caloric restriction. However, the cellular mechanism by which INDY does this is unknown. In order to examine the effect that INDY might have on energy metabolism and insulin sensitivity in mammals we created the first knock out mouse model of the mammalian INDY homologue SLC13A5. Here, we show that deletion of the mammalian homologue of INDY, SLC13A5 (mINDY) in mice (mINDY-/- mice) have increased mitochondrial biogenesis, hepatic lipid oxidation, and energy expenditure, but decreased hepatic de novo lipogenesis. Loss of mIndy activates hepatic AMPK, which induces PGC-1?, inhibits ACC-2, and reduces SREBP-1c levels.  In contrast to wild- type mice, mINDY-/- mice have reduced body weight and are protected from insulin resistance that evolves with high-fat feeding and aging. These studies demonstrate that mIndy functions as a novel regulator of mammalian energy metabolism and suggest that mIndy might be a novel therapeutic target for the treatment of obesity and type 2 diabetes.

DESIGN
An SLC13A5 knockout mouse model (mINDY-/-) was generated.  The litters  produced when heterozygous (KO/+) mINDY mice (mINDY+/-) were bred, contained the expected ratio of Illumina Mouse-ref8Indy wild-type (mINDY+/+), mINDY+/- mice, and homozygous mIndy (mINDY-/-) pups, indicating no substantial embryonic lethality. In wild-type mice, Indy mRNA expression was highest in liver, and very low in white adipose tissue, brown adipose tissue, skeletal muscle, small and large intestines and the pancreas confirming previous mINDY expression levels in rodents, and humans. In the liver, mINDY mRNA expression was completely abolished in the INDY-/- mice and ~50% reduced in heterozygous mINDY+/- mice.  Total RNA from the Liver tissue of 5 replicate Wt and 5 replicate Knockout mice were labeled and hybridized to Illumina Mouse-ref8  v2 bead arrays.  Analysis of gene expression was carried out by Hierarchy clustering/K-means clustering and Principal Components Analysis (PCA), as well as The Parameterized Analysis of Gene Enrichment (PAGE) and Ingenuity Pathways Analysis IPA (Ingenuity Systems, CA, USA).

PLATFORM
GPL6885 Illumina MouseRef-8 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
21803289

