TITLE
Cultured human amniotic fluid-derived mesenchymal stromal cells [PIQOR data]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Human amniotic fluid-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (hAMSC) have become one of the main cell populations used in regenerative medicine and for the study of various clinical disorders. These cells have a great capacity for proliferation and differentiation, do not form teratomas when transplanted into animal models and their stemness seems to be between embryonic cells and adult mesenchymal cells. Prior to their use in cell therapy they must be cultured and expanded in vitro, but the effect this process has on their fitness, a determining factor for the success or failure of cell therapy, is unknown. We undertook a follow-up of gene and microRNAs (miRNAs) expression using microarray of a hAMSC population kept under in vitro culture conditions for the first 15 passages. Significant changes were noted in the expression of various mRNAs and miRNAs, particularly down-regulation of TP53, increased expression of hsa-miR-125a and up-regulation of CDKN2D. The variations in TP53 and hsa-miR-125a may act as an indicator of the stemness of the hAMSC, whereas CDKN2D may indicate the reduction in the proliferative capacity of these cells in a TP53-independent mechanism. The genes described in this study will help evaluate the fitness of hAMSC, thus guaranteeing their biological quality for use in regenerative medicine.

DESIGN
The variations in the expression patterns of the mRNAs were studied using topic-defined PIQOR Stem Cell microarrays. Human amniotic fluid-derived mesenchymal stromal cells pellets of 5 x 10E5 cells were cryopreserved in liquid nitrogen and send to Miltenyi Biotec for their analysis. A pool of non-stimulated lymphocytes (non-mitotic cell cycle) obtained by Ficoll isolation in the Immunology Service of Carlos Haya hospital was used as a control of the expression.

PLATFORM
GPL13480 PIQOR (TM) Stem Cell Microarray, human AS (780)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

