TITLE
Epigenetic repression of cardiac progenitor gene expression by Ezh2 is required for postnatal cardiac homeostasis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Adult-onset diseases can be associated with in utero events, but mechanisms for such temporally distant dysregulation of organ function remain unknown.  The polycomb histone methyltransferase, Ezh2, stabilizes transcription by depositing repressive histone marks during development that persist into adulthood, but the function of Ezh2-mediated transcriptional stability in postnatal organ homeostasis is not understood. Here, we show that Ezh2 stabilizes the postnatal cardiac gene expression program and prevents cardiac pathology, primarily by repressing the homeodomain transcription factor Six1 in differentiating cardiac progenitors. Loss of Ezh2 in embryonic cardiac progenitors, but not in differentiated cardiomyocytes, resulted in postnatal cardiac pathology, including cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and fibrosis. Loss of Ezh2 caused broad derepression of skeletal muscle genes, including the homeodomain transcription factor Six1, which is expressed in cardiac progenitors but is normally silenced upon cardiac differentiation. Many of the deregulated genes are direct Six1 targets, implying a critical requirement for stable repression of Six1 in cardiac myocytes. Indeed, upon de-repression, Six1 promotes cardiac pathology, as it was sufficient to induce cardiac hypertrophy. Furthermore, genetic reduction of Six1 levels almost completely rescued the pathology of Ezh2-deficient hearts. Thus, repression of a single transcription factor in cardiac progenitors by Ezh2 is essential for stability of the adult heart gene expression program and homeostasis. Our results suggest that epigenetic dysregulation during discrete developmental windows can predispose to adult disease and dysregulated stress responses.

DESIGN
Global gene expression profiles of Ezh2-deficient hearts. The right ventricle and the interventricular septum of five wild type (Ezh2f/f) and four Ezh2-deficient (Ezh2f/f;Mef2cAHF::Cre) mice were analyzed.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
22267199

