TITLE
Genetic toxicology and toxicogenomic analysis of 3 cigarette smoke condensates in vitro reveals few differences between high and low tar brands

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
This experiment investigated the response of mouse pulmonary epithelial cells in culture (FE1 cell line) to 3 different brands of cigarette smoke condensate. The three brands represent a full flavour, regular and king-size light cigarettes. These vary in some key chemical consistuents. Brand #1 has the highest tar content. The cells were exposed to two doses: one at approximately 50% cytotoxicity, and the other at approximately 20%. Both doses were clastogenic. The major pathways affected included xenobiotic metabolism, cell cycle, apoptosis, oxidative stress and inflammation. Although brand #1 exhibited the most numbers of genes that were differentially expressed, there did not appear to be any major differences in the expression profiles between the brands. Although some genes did not reach statistical significance, in general there was consistency in the direction of fold changes for genes across all brands.

DESIGN
MutaMouse FE1 cells in culture (derived from lung epithelial cells) were exposed to cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) collected from 3 brands: Brand #1 – Full Flavor; Brand #3 – Regular; Brand #5 – Light King Size. Experiments were performed on 5 replicates per condition (i.e., n=5 per group); one replicate was removed from 4 groups later in the study. Cells were exposed at 70% confluence in 150 mm plates to either 45 µg/ml or 90 µg/ml CSC alongside cells exposed to 1% DMSO (Sigma-Alderich, Canada) in 1:1 DMEM:F12 (without FBS). Cells were exposed to CSC for 6 hours and then either: (a) immediately harvested, or (b) washed in PBS and cultured for another 4 hours in fresh media. The two time points were called 6 hours or 10 hours (6 hours exposure, 4 hours recovery for the latter). Cells were harvested with TRIzol (Invitrogen) and stored at -80oC. RNA was extracted and labelled, and hybridized to Agilent 22K mouse development microarrays following the manufacturer's protocol (Agilent Technologies Inc., USA). Arrays were washed and scanned on a ScanArray Express (Perkin-Elmer Life Sciences), and data were acquired with ImaGene 5.5 (BioDiscovery Inc.). Biological samples were hybridized in Cy5, and Stratagene Universal Reference RNA was hybridized in Cy3.

PLATFORM
GPL891 Agilent-011978 Mouse Microarray G4121A (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
22431010

