TITLE
Concerted involvement of Cdx/Hox genes and Wnt signalling in morphogenesis of the caudal neural tube and cloacal derivatives from the posterior growth zone.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Decrease in Cdx dosage in an allelic series of mouse Cdx mutants leads to  progressively more severe posterior vertebral defects. These defects are corrected  by posterior gain of function of the Wnt effector Lef1. Precocious expression of Hox  paralogous 13 genes also induces vertebral axis truncation by antagonizing Cdx  function. We report here that the phenotypic similarity also applies to patterning of  the caudal neural tube and uro-rectal tracts in Cdx and Wnt3a mutants, and in  embryos precociously expressing Hox13 genes. Cdx2 inactivation after placentation  leads to posterior defects including incomplete uro-rectal septation. Compound  mutants carrying one active Cdx2 allele in the Cdx4 null background (Cdx2/4),  transgenic embryos precociously expressing Hox13 genes, and a novel Wnt3a  hypomorph mutant all manifest a comparable phenotype with similar urorectal  defects. Phenotype and transcriptome analysis in early Cdx mutants, genetic rescue  experiments and gene expression studies lead us to propose that Cdx transcription  factors act via Wnt signalling during the laying down of urorectal mesoderm, and that  they are operative in an early phase of these events, at the site of tissue progenitors  in the posterior growth zone of the embryo. Cdx and Wnt mutations and premature  Hox13 expression also cause similar neural dysmorphology including ectopic neural  structures sometimes leading to neural tube splitting at caudal axial levels. These  findings involve the Cdx genes, canonical Wnt signalling, and the temporal control of  posterior Hox gene expression in posterior morphogenesis in the different embryonic  germ layers. They shed a new light on the etiology of the Caudal Dysplasia or  Caudal Regression range of human congenital defects.

DESIGN
We used dissected Cdx2 null mutant versus wild type embryos at the 4/5 somite and 7/8 somite stage. RNA was isolated from the posterior part of the embryos (20 embryos of each genotype and stage), dissected at the same axial levels by using the last somite boundary and the base of the allantois as landmarks. Differentially labelled cRNA from the Cdx2 and control embryos were hybridized on 4X44K Agilent Whole Mouse Genome dual colour Microarrays (G4122F) in two dye swap experiments and two technical replicates, resulting in eight individual arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
21752936

