TITLE
Global Gene Expression Analysis of Murine Limb Development

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Detailed information about stage-specific changes in gene expression is crucial for understanding the gene regulatory networks underlying development and the various signal transduction pathways contributing to morphogenesis. Here, we describe the global gene expression dynamics during early murine limb development, when cartilage, tendons, muscle, joints, vasculature, and nerves are specified and the musculoskeletal system of the limbs is established. We used whole-genome microarrays to identify genes with differential expression at 5 stages of limb development (E9.5 to 13.5), during fore-limb and hind-limb patterning. We found that the onset of limb formation is characterized by an up-regulation of transcription factors, which is followed by a massive activation of genes during E10.5 and E11.5 which tampers off at later time points. Among 3520 genes identified as significantly up-regulated in the limb, we find ~30% to be novel, dramatically expanding the repertoire of candidate genes likely to function in the limb. Hierarchical and stage-specific clustering identified expression profiles that correlate with functional programs during limb development and are likely to provide new insights into specific tissue patterning processes. Here we provide for the first time, a comprehensve analysis of developmentally regulated genes during murine limb development, and provide some novel insights into the expression dynamics governing limb morphogenesis.

DESIGN
Fifty- one arrays were analyzed, consisting of whole fore-limb and hind-limb bud RNA (experimental) and whole embryo RNA (reference) samples from E9.5 to E13.5 DPC mouse (FVB strain). Embryos were not pooled to generate samples. Each time point has 3 to 5 biological replicates for limb bud samples, duplicates for whole embryos. Comparisons were made between limb bud samples and whole embryo at the same stage, fore-limb samples of different stages, hind-limb samples of different stages, and fore-limb samples compared to hind-limb samples at the same or the next stage.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
22174793

