TITLE
The Ankrd2, Cdkn1c and Calcyclin Genes are Under the Control of MyoD During Myogenic Differentiation

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Skeletal muscle development requires the coordinated expression of numerous transcription factors to control the specification of the muscle fate in mesodermal cells and the differentiation of the committed myoblasts into functional contractile fibers. The bHLH transcription factor MyoD plays a key role in these processes, since its forced expression is sufficient to induce the myogenesis in a variety of non-muscle cells in culture. Consistent with this observation, the majority of skeletal muscle genes requires MyoD to activate their own transcription. In order to identify novel MyoD-target genes we generated C2C12 MyoD-silenced clones, and used a muscle-specific cDNA microarray to study the induced modifications of the transcriptional profile. Gene expression was analyzed at three different stages in differentiating MyoD(-)C2C12 myoblasts. These microarray data sets identified many additional uncharacterized downstream MyoD transcripts that may play important functions in muscle cell differentiation. Among these genes, we concentrated our study on the cell cycle regulators Cdkn1c and calcyclin and on the muscle-specific putative myogenic regulator Ankrd2. Bioinformatic and functional studies on the promoters of these genes clarified their dependence on MyoD activity. Clues of other regulatory mechanisms that might interact with the principal bHLH transcription factor have been revealed by the unexpected up regulation in MyoD(-) cells of these novel (and other) target transcripts, at the differentiation stage in which MyoD became normally down regulated. Keywords: MyoD, cell cycle regulation, cDNA microarray, myogenic differentiation, gene regulation

DESIGN
RNAs purified from C2C12 MyoD(-)cl.A8 at one, three and six myogenic differentiation time-points were compared with RNA from C2C12 control cells at the corresponding differentiation stages. These samples were labeled and hybridized to muscle specific microarrays produced by our group (Human Array 1.0). Two replicates of each experiment were performed using different microarray slides, in which sample and reference RNAs, labeled either with Cy3 or Cy5 fluorochromes, were crossed in both combinations (dye-swapping procedure).

PLATFORM
GPL2677 Human Array 1.0

CITATIONS
15890200

