TITLE
Genomic Multivariate Predictors of Response to Adjuvant Chemotherapy in Ovarian Carcinoma: Predicting Platinum Resistance

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Purpose:  Despite advances in radical surgery and chemotherapy delivery, ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy.  Most of these patients are treated with platinum-based chemotherapies, but there is no biomarker model to guide their responses to these therapeutic agents.   We have developed and independently tested our novel multivariate molecular predictors for forecasting patients' responses to individual drugs on a cohort of 58 ovarian cancer patients. Experimental Design:  We adapted and applied the previously-published COXEN algorithm to develop molecular predictors for therapeutic responses of patients' tumors based on expression signatures derived from the NCI-60 in vitro drug activities and genomic expression data. Genome-wide candidate biomarkers were first triaged by examining expression patterns of frozen and formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue samples.  We then identify initial drug sensitivity biomarkers for carboplatin and paclitaxel, respectively. These biomarkers  were further narrowed by examining concordant expression patterns between cell lines and a historical set of ovarian cancer patients. Multivariate predictors were obtained from the NCI-60 cell lines and refined using historical patient cohorts. To independent validate these molecular predictors,  we performed genome-wide profiling on FFPE samples of 58 ovarian cancer patients obtained prior to adjuvant chemotherapy. Results: Carboplatin predictor significantly stratified platinum sensitive and resistant patients (p = 0.019) with sensitivity = 93%, specificity = 33%, PPV = 65%, and NPV = 78%. Paclitaxel predictor also significantly stratified patients' responses (p = 0.033) with sensitivity = 96%, specificity = 26%, PPV = 61%, and NPV = 86%.  The combination predictor for platinum-taxane combination demonstrated a significant survival difference between the predicted responders and nonresponders with median survival of 12.9 months vs. 8.1 months (p = 0.045). Conclusions: COXEN predictors successfully stratified  platinum resistance and taxane response in this retrospective cohort, especially based on their FFPE tumor samples. Accurate prediction of chemotherapeutic response, especially to platinum agents is highly clinically relevant and could alter primary management of ovarian cancer.

DESIGN
Gene expression data from 58 stage III-IV ovarian cancer patients treated with Carboplatin and Taxol agents

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
22348014

