TITLE
Rabbit heart gene expression in Left ventricle (LV) following banding of the descending thoracic aorta (AOB-LV) vs Sham-control LV and  in Right ventricle (RV) following banding the pulmonary artery (PAB-RV) vs. Sham-control RV

ORGANISM
Oryctolagus cuniculus

SUMMARY
Background: Right ventricular (RV) and left ventricular (LV) myocardium differ in their response to pressure-overload hypertrophy (POH). In this report we use microarray and proteomic analyses to identify pathways modulated by LV-, and RV-POH in the immature heart. Methods: Newborn New Zealand White rabbits underwent banding of the descending thoracic aorta (LV-POH; n=6). RV-POH was achieved by banding the pulmonary artery (n=6). Sham–control animals (SC; n=6 each) were sham-manipulated. Following 4 (LV-POH) and 6 weeks (RV-POH) recovery, the hearts were removed and matched sample RNA and proteins were isolated for microarray and proteomic analysis. Results: There was no difference in body weight in RV-, LV-POH vs. SC but there was a significant increase vs. SC in RV (3.2±0.8g vs. 1.2±0.3g; P < 0.01) and LV weight (7.08±0.6g vs. 4.02±0.2g; P < 0.01). Fractional area change (RV-POH) and shortening fraction (LV-POH) decreased significantly (23±6 vs. 47±6 and 21±4 vs.44±2, respectively, P < 0.01).   Microarray analysis demonstrated that LV-POH enriched pathways for oxidative phosphorylation, mitochondria energy pathways, actin, ILK, hypoxia, calcium and protein kinase-A signalling. RV-POH enriched pathways for cardiac oxidative phosphorylation.  Proteomic analysis revealed 19 proteins were uniquely expressed in LV-POH vs. SC. Functional annotation clustering analysis indicated significant enrichment for the mitochondrion, cellular macromolecular complex assembly and oxidative phosphorylation.  RV-POH had 15 uniquely expressed proteins vs. SC. Functional annotation clustering analysis indicated significant enrichment in structural constituents of muscle, cardiac muscle tissue development and calcium handling. Conclusion: Our results identify unique transcript and protein expression profiles in LV, RV-POH and provide new insight into the biological basis of ventricular specific hypertrophy.

DESIGN
3 different conditions: PAB-RV vs. Sham-control RV, PAB-RV [test] vs. PAB-LV [control], AOB-LV vs. Sham-control LV.

PLATFORM
GPL13758 New Zealand White Rabbit Heart 15K cDNA array

CITATIONS
23262132

