TITLE
Transcriptome profiling reveals a novel role for Trichostatin A in antagonizing histone chaperone Chz1 mediated telomere anti-silencing.

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
The histone chaperones play an important role in chromatin assembly and disassembly during replication and transcription. We assessed the global roles of histone chaperones in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microarray transcriptional analyses indicate that histone chaperones have their own specific target genes, and various histone chaperones have partially overlapping functions during transcriptional regulation. Histone deacetylase inhibitor TSA and histone chaperones Asf1, Vps75 and Rtt106 can function in parallel pathways to regulate transcription. Moreover, TSA can specifically antagonize histone chaperone Chz1-mediated telomere anti-silencing. This study demonstrates that a mutual cross-talk mechanism exists between histone chaperones and histone deacetylation in transcriptional regulation.

DESIGN
All yeast strains used in this study are listed in the paper (Table S1). CHZ1, NAP1, ASF1, VPS75 and RTT106 genes were deleted individually by homologous recombination in BY4742 (WT) by using a previously described in (Wan, Y. et al. MCB, 2009) PCR-based procedure. The strains were cultured at 30°C in YPD (1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, 2% glucose) media. For TSA treatments, WT and deletion mutants were grown to mid-log phase (OD600=0.5), TSA (Sigma-Aldrich) was then added to the yeast cultures at a final concentration of 10 μM and cells were cultured for additional hour.Total RNA was isolated by hot acid phenol extraction protocol as previously described in Wan, Y. et al. MCB, 2009. Microarray labeling and hybridization reactions were performed as previously described in Wan, Y. et al. MCB, 2009 and Wan, Y. et al. NAR, 2010. Two color microarrays, comparing RNA from the experimental conditions (deletion mutations grown in YPD, WT and deletion mutations grown in YPD with TSA treatment) to RNA from the control WT cells grown in glucose-containing medium (YPD), were performed using Agilent whole-genome S. cerevisiae arrays.

