TITLE
Heterobasidion irregulare gene expression from different tissues and mycelium grown on different substrates

ORGANISM
Heterobasidion irregulare

SUMMARY
Transcript profiles of Heterobasion irregulare from different tissues and mycelium grown on different substrates were analyzed. The array probes were designed from gene models taken from the Joint Genome Institute (JGI, department of energy) Heterobasidion annosum genome sequence version 1. One aim of this study was to verify the expression of the automatically annotated gene models under various conditions. Another goal was to compare gene expression profiles from different tissues of Heterobasidion irregulare and from mycelium grown on liquid MMN medium, liquid medium amended with lignin or cellulose and on wood.

DESIGN
The Heterobasidion annosum custom-exon expression array (4 x 72K) manufactured byRoche NimbleGen Systems Limited (Madison, WI) ( http://www.nimblegen.com/products /exp/index.html) contained five independent, nonidentical, 60-mer probes per gene model coding sequence. For 12,199 of the 12,299 annotated protein-coding gene models probes could be designed. For 19 gene models no probes could be generated and 81 gene models shared all five probes with other gene models. Included in the array were 916 random 60-mer control probes and labelling controls. For 2032 randomly chosen gene models, technical duplicates were included on the array. We performed 18 hybridizations (NimbleGen) with samples derived from Heterobasidion irregulare fruiting bodies (four biological replicates) , from necrotic bark of pines inoculated with H. irregulare (21dpi; three biological replicates), from H. irregulare mycelium grown in liquid MMN medium (three biological replicates) as well as from H. irregulare grown on wood shavings from pine (four biological replicates), grown in liquid medium amended with lignin  (2 biological replicates) and growth in liquid medium amended with cellulose from Spruce  (2 biological replicates). Cultures were harvested after 3 weeks of incubation 22°C in darkness. All samples were labeled with Cy3.

PLATFORM
GPL13772 Heterobasidion annosum 12K whole genome expression array

CITATIONS
22463738

