TITLE
Murine DN T-reg cells impart prolonged cardiac allograft survival

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Recent studies have demonstrated that both mouse and human alpha beta TCR(+)CD3(+)NK1.1(-)CD4(-)CD8- double-negative regulatory T (DN Treg) cells can suppress Ag-specific immune responses mediated by CD8+ and CD4+ T cells. To identify molecules involved in DN Treg cell function, we generated a panel of murine DN Treg clones, which specifically kill activated syngeneic CD8+ T cells. Through serial cultivation of DN Treg clones, mutant clones arose that lost regulatory capacity in vitro and in vivo. Although all allogeneic cardiac grafts in animals preinfused with tolerant CD4/CD8 negative 12 DN Treg clones survived over 100 days, allograft survival is unchanged following infusion of mutant clones (19.5 +/- 11.1 days) compared with untreated controls (22.8 +/- 10.5 days; p < 0.001). Global gene expression differences between functional DN Treg cells and nonfunctional mutants were compared. We found 1099 differentially expressed genes (q < 0.025%), suggesting increased cell proliferation and survival, immune regulation, and chemotaxis, together with decreased expression of genes for Ag presentation, apoptosis, and protein phosphatases involved in signal transduction. Expression of 33 overexpressed and 24 underexpressed genes were confirmed using quantitative real-time PCR. Protein expression of several genes, including Fc epsilon RI gamma subunit and CXCR5, which are > 50-fold higher, was also confirmed using FACS. These findings shed light on the mechanisms by which DN Treg cells down-regulate immune responses and prolong cardiac allograft survival. Type 2 experiment where functional DN T-reg cells (CN4 or TN12) were cy-3 labeled and co-hybridized with non-functional mutant cell lines (CN4.8 or CN12.8).  Used 100 ug total-RNA each channel and no amplifaction. A transcript identification design type characterizes the length and position of transcripts and allows identification of all forms of transcripts in the genome. Keywords: transcript_identification_design

DESIGN
Using regression correlation

PLATFORM
GPL2698 MMC

CITATIONS
15814674

