TITLE
Time course global expression profiles of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii during photo-biological hydrogen production

ORGANISM
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

SUMMARY
We used Chlamydomonas microarray v2.0 to compare the time course expression profiles of two Chlamydomonas reinhardtii strains: wild-type WT and the high hydrogen producing mutant Stm6Glc4 during sulfur starvation induced hydrogen production. Major cellular reorganizations in photosynthetic apparatus, sulfur and carbon metabolism upon H2 production were confirmed as common to both strains. More importantly, our results pointed out factors which lead to the higher hydrogen production in the mutant including higher light sensitivity and lower competitions with hydrogenase by alternative electron sinks. Under S-starvation induced H2 producing conditions the induction of LHCSR3, a chlorophyll binding protein involving in non photochemical quenching, was significantly lower in Stm6Glc4 resulting in significant higher photodamage to photosystem II. Consequently, Stm6Glc4 had a shorter aerobic phase, consumed less starch reserves, and produced H2 earlier at higher rates than WT. We also showed that the loss of mitochondrial DNA-binding protein MOC1 in both knockdown and knockout mutant resulted in higher light sensitivity and improved H2 yield. Furthermore, by comparing our data with previously published ‘omics’ data, we were able to identify genes that responded specifically to either sulfur starvation, anaerobiosis or hydrogen production as well as to provide a more complete picture of S-deprived H2 production in the green alga C. reinhardtii.

DESIGN
A total of 33 microarray hydridizations were performed covering samples taken during the course of S deprivation induced H2 producction. The samples included 4 time points in the high hydrogen producing mutant Stm6Glc4 (taken at 16, 28, 52 and 76h) and 6 time points in the wildtype CC-406 (taken at 16, 28, 52, 68, 92, 116h). Samples from each time point were compared directly with the sample taken prior to S starvation from the corresponding strain. Three biological replicates were tested at each time point.

