TITLE
miRNA expression profiles from E18th rat embryonic striatal stem cells under conditioned environments

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Background: Striatum is the crucial unit in brain involved in higher-level organizational learning, motor control and cognitive finctions. It also produces dopaminergic neurons, which play an important role in the control of multiple brain functions including voluntary movement and a span of neurobehavioral processes such as, mood, reward, addiction, and stress. Traumatic brain injury (TBI) lead to striatum related persistent cognitive dysfunctions. A number of cell based therapies such as;  induced pluripotent stem cells (ips), neural stem cells (NSCs) and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), have been investigated so far for their potential application in TBI. But the journey from bench-to-bedside has not yet been covered sucessfully. As their survival and long-term maintenance in vivo has been huddle so far. So to understand the fate of embryonic striatal stem cells (ESSCs) in long-term neurogenesis in vitro, we have studied the neurogenic potential of rat embryonic striatal stem cells from E18th day embryos under conditioned microenvironments. Objectives: To evaluate the neuro-regenerative potential striatum-derived stem cells, we have employed synergestic effects of certain neurotrophins, such as ; EGF, IGF, FGF and LIF as in four combinations (Control/untreated-A, EGF+FGF-B, EGF+FGF+LIF-C, EGF+FGF+IGF-D and EGF+FGF+ IGF +LIF –E) in the microenvironment . To decipher the regulatory miRNAs involved in ESSC-derived neurogenesis, we have performed detailed miRNA  profiling for ESSCs at passage 3 for groupD and group E derived ESSCs (based on their performance in vitro). Out data has explored cruicial mIRNAs involved in strital neurogenesis .

DESIGN
Striatum has been shown to control the major part in higher-level organizational aspects of learning in human. To understand the role of striatum-derived neural progenitors in neural repair, miRNA regulation was trapped for ESSCs under conditioned stimuli. Among different combinatorial stimuli, group D;(EGF+FGF-2+IGF) and group E; EGF+FGF-2+IGF+LIF) tretaed ESSCs were selected at passage 3 for miRNA analysis experiment.

PLATFORM
GPL8786 [miRNA-1] Affymetrix Multispecies miRNA-1 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

