TITLE
Gene expression profiling of mammary epithelial cells and their role in the predisposition to Staphylococcus aureus infections

ORGANISM
Ovis aries

SUMMARY
Background: Staphylococcus aureus is a major pathogen of humans and animals. Host genetics influence the susceptibility to S. aureus infections, and genes determining infection outcome remain to be identified. Here, we used outbred animals from a divergent selection on susceptibility towards Staphylococcus infection to explore host immunogenetics. Methodology/Principal Findings: We investigated in vitro how mammary epithelial cells (MEC) respond to live S. aureus or S. aureus supernatant and whether MEC from animals with different degree of susceptibility to intra-mammary infections have distinct gene expression profiles. We measured the expression of 15K probes in MEC after each kind of stimulation (living bacteria or culture supernatant) at three different time points (a reference without bacteria, 1 and 5 hours) with ovine Agilent microarrays. Furthermore, a selected number of genes were confirmed by RT-qPCR. Gene signatures of stimulated MEC were obtained and genes involved in the cell cycle and metabolic processes were down-regulated during the kinetics and the apoptosis pathways were highly modified after both live bacteria and supernatant stimulations. Genes involved in immune response were up-regulated over-all after supernatant exposure. Furthermore 23 genes were differentially expressed between the resistant and susceptible animals, two of them were involed in oxidative processes, but the differences between the animals were very few.  Conclusion/Significance: we successfully obtained Staphylococcus aureus associated gene expression of ovine MEC in a 5 hour kinetics experiment. The in vitro MEC model does not provide much information on the differences between Staphylococcus resistant and susceptible animals. Keywords: Staphylococcus aureus ; mammary epithelial cells ; mammalian ; transcriptome ; immunity ; mastitis

DESIGN
59 samples in a two-colour dye-swap experimental design.

