TITLE
The NOD/SCID Xenograft Model Provides Clinically-Relevant Insights into Glucocorticoid-Induced Gene Expression in Childhood B-Cell Precursor Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Introduction. Glucocorticoids are critical drugs used to treat acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and response to glucocorticoids is highly predictive of outcome. Here we report a study evaluating the NOD/SCID xenograft mouse model to investigate glucocorticoid-induced gene expression. Methods. NOD/SCID mice were inoculated with ALL-3, a glucocorticoid-sensitive xenograft, and when highly engrafted were randomised to either dexamethasone 15mg/kg or vehicle control IP. Cells were harvested at 0, 8, 24 or 48 hours thereafter, RNA was extracted and hybridised onto Illumina WG-6_V3 chips. Results. The 8 hour dexamethasone-treated timepoint had the highest number of significantly differentially expressed genes with minimal changes seen across the time-matched controls. Replicate analysis revealed that using data from 3 replicates instead of 4 resulted in excellent recovery scores of > 0.9 at timepoints with high signal. When assessed at the level of pathways, gene expression changes in the 8 hour xenograft samples were similar to patients treated with glucocorticoids. Conclusions. The NOD/SCID xenograft mouse model provides a reproducible experimental model system in which to investigate clinically-relevant mechanisms of in vivo glucocorticoid-induced gene regulation in ALL; the 8 hour timepoint provides the highest number of significantly differentially expressed genes; time-matched controls are redundant and excellent recovery scores can be obtained with 3 replicates.

DESIGN
At 0, 8, 24 or 48 hours, NOD/SCID xenograft mice were treated with vehicle control, or dexamethasone. We used 4 biological replicates per time point (3 at the 48hour time point), each of which went onto an Illumina HumanWG-6_V3_0_R1_11282955_A microarray. Samples from each of the 7 groups were divided across a total of 5 microarray slides

PLATFORM
GPL6884 Illumina HumanWG-6 v3.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
22093874

