TITLE
Transcriptional response of susceptible and tolerant citrus to infection with Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus

ORGANISM
Citrus reticulata ; Citrus reticulata x Citrus trifoliata

SUMMARY
Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus (Las), a non-culturable phloem-limited bacterium, is the suspected causal agent of Huanglongbing (HLB) in Florida.  HLB is one of the most devastating diseases of citrus and no resistant cultivars have been identified to date, though tolerance has been suggested in the genus Poncirus.  A recent study conducted in our laboratory demonstrated tolerance of US-897, a hybrid of Poncirus trifoliata (L. Raf.) and the susceptible ‘Cleopatra’ mandarin (Citrus reticulata Blanco), to Ca. L. asiaticus, the presumed causal agent of HLB in Florida (Albrecht & Bowman, HortScience 46 (2011) 16-22). This study compares transcriptional changes in tolerant US-897 and susceptible ‘Cleopatra’ mandarin seedlings in response to infection with Las using the Affymetrix GeneChip citrus array with the main objective of identifying genes associated with tolerance to HLB.  Such genes may be suitable as potential targets for biotechnology approaches, providing one strategy to possibly control this destructive disease of citrus.

DESIGN
Fifteen months-old seedlings of the genotypes 'Cleopatra' mandarin and US-897 were graft-inoculated with non-infected (control) or Las-infected tissue from greenhouse-grown 'Valencia' (C. sinensis L.) plants.  Six non-infected control plants each from 'Cleopatra' (MC)  and US-897 (TC) and six infected plants each from Cleopatra (MI) and US-897 (TI) were used.  Four to six leaves per plant were excised at 32 weeks after inoculation (wai) and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Total RNA was extracted from all 24 plants.  Equal amounts of RNA from two samples were pooled to obtain three biological replicates per genotype and treatment and used for hybridization on Affymetrix citrus microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL5731 [Citrus] Affymetrix Citrus Genome Array

CITATIONS
22325873

