TITLE
Members of the H3K4 trimethylation complex regulate lifespan in a germline-dependent manner in C. elegans

ORGANISM
Caenorhabditis elegans

SUMMARY
The plasticity of ageing suggests that longevity may be controlled epigenetically by specific alterations in chromatin state. The link between chromatin and ageing has mostly focused on histone deacetylation by the Sir2 family1, 2, but less is known about the role of other histone modifications in longevity. Histone methylation has a crucial role in development and in maintaining stem cell pluripotency in mammals3. Regulators of histone methylation have been associated with ageing in worms4, 5, 6, 7 and flies8, but characterization of their role and mechanism of action has been limited. Here we identify the ASH-2 trithorax complex9, which trimethylates histone H3 at lysine 4 (H3K4), as a regulator of lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans in a directed RNA interference (RNAi) screen in fertile worms. Deficiencies in members of the ASH-2 complex—ASH-2 itself, WDR-5 and the H3K4 methyltransferase SET-2—extend worm lifespan. Conversely, the H3K4 demethylase RBR-2 is required for normal lifespan, consistent with the idea that an excess of H3K4 trimethylation—a mark associated with active chromatin—is detrimental for longevity. Lifespan extension induced by ASH-2 complex deficiency requires the presence of an intact adult germline and the continuous production of mature eggs. ASH-2 and RBR-2 act in the germline, at least in part, to regulate lifespan and to control a set of genes involved in lifespan determination. These results indicate that the longevity of the soma is regulated by an H3K4 methyltransferase/demethylase complex acting in the C. elegans germline.

DESIGN
There are 23 samples in total. ASH-2 knock-down increases lifespan in a germline dependent manner. We examined ASH-2 regulated genes that are dependent on the presence of an intact germline using WT or glp-1(e2141ts) mutant worms which develop only 5-15 meiotic germ cells treated with either empty vector (EV) or ash-2 RNAi. We examined gene expression at the L3 stage (when we observe changes in H3K4me3) and at a mid life stage (day 8). The majority of ASH-2 controlled genes were regulated in a germline dependent manner. Samples were collected in triplicate for each condition (but Day 8 N2 (WT) E.V. #3 was excluded from all analysis due to quality issues).

PLATFORM
GPL200 [Celegans] Affymetrix C. elegans Genome Array

CITATIONS
20555324

