TITLE
MYCN-MB with MYCN amplification

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
BACKGROUND  Focal high-level amplifications of MYC define a subset of high-risk medulloblastoma patients. However, the prognostic role of MYCN oncogene amplification remains less clear. We aimed to evaluate the prognostic value of this alteration alone and in combination with biological modifiers in a large cohort of 67 pediatric medulloblastomas with MYCN amplification (MYCN-MB).     METHODS  Twenty-one MYCN-MB with MYCN amplication  and 56 MYCN-MB were respectively examined using either gene expression profiling and array-CGH, or immunohistochemical analysis and FISH. All 67 tumors were further subject to mutational analyses. Semi non-negative matrix factorization–based and unsupervised hierarchical clustering methods were used to identify biological groups. We compared molecular, clinical, and prognostic characteristics both within biological MYCN-MB groups and with non-amplified tumors.    RESULTS  Transcriptomic analysis of this large cohort of MYCN-MBs demonstrated a significant enrichment of MYCN-MB in the SHH and group D variants. Further substantiating this biological dichotomy of MYCN-MB, respective group affiliations were also accompanied by variant-specific cytogenetic aberrations including deletion of 9q in the SHH variant, and gain of 7q and isochromosome 17q/17q gain in MYCN-MBs clustering with group D tumors. Among clinically relevant variables, SHH subtype and 10q loss for Non-SHH tumors comprised the most powerful markers of favorable prognosis in MYCN-MB.    CONCLUSION  We demonstrate considerable heterogeneity within MYCN-MB in terms of genetics, tumor biology, and clinical outcome. Thus, assessment of disease group and 10q copy-number status may improve risk stratification of this group and may delineate MYCN-MB with the same dismal prognosis as MYC amplified tumors. Furthermore, based on the enrichment of MYCN and GLI2 amplifications in SHH-driven medulloblastoma, amplification of these downstream signaling intermediates should be excluded before a patient is enrolled into a clinical trial using a Smoothened inhibitor.

DESIGN
Fresh frozen tumor material was collected during tumor resection. Gene expression profiles illustrate distinct expression pattern at diagnosis. This submission represents the gene expression component of the study only

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
22160402

