TITLE
Temporal expression data from 17 health human subjects before and after they were challenged with live influenza (H3N2/Wisconsin) viruses

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The transcriptional responses of human hosts towards influenza viral pathogens are important for understanding virus-mediated immunopathology.  Despite great advances gained through studies using model organisms, the complete temporal host transcriptional responses in a natural human system are poorly understood.  In a human challenge study using live influenza (H3N2/Wisconsin) viruses, we conducted a clinically uninformed (unsupervised) factor analysis on gene expression profiles and established an ab initio molecular signature that strongly correlates to symptomatic clinical disease. This is followed by the identification of 42 biomarkers whose expression patterns best differentiate early from late phases of infection. In parallel, a clinically informed (supervised) analysis revealed over-stimulation of multiple viral sensing pathways in symptomatic hosts and linked their temporal trajectory with development of diverse clinical signs and symptoms.  The resultant inflammatory cytokine profiles were shown to contribute to the pathogenesis because their significant increase preceded disease manifestation by 36 hours.  In subclinical asymptomatic hosts, we discovered strong transcriptional regulation of genes involved in inflammasome activation, genes encoding virus interacting proteins, and evidence of active anti-oxidant and cell-mediated innate immune response. Taken together, our findings offer insights into influenza virus-induced pathogenesis and provide a valuable tool for disease monitoring and management in natural environments.

DESIGN
During the challenge study, subjects had  peripheral blood taken 24 hours prior to inoculation with virus (baseline), immediately prior to inoculation (pre-challenge) and at set intervals (8 hour intervals) following challenge. RNA was extracted at Expression Analysis (Durham, NC) from whole blood using the PAXgene™ 96 Blood RNA Kit (PreAnalytiX, Valencia, CA) employing the manufacturer's recommended protocol. While whole blood RNA is initially extracted, a secondary procedure (B-globin reduction) was then employed to remove the contribution of red blood cell (RBC) RNA to the total RNA. A set of four peptide nucleic acid (PNA) oligomers whose sequences are complementary to the 3’ portions of the alpha and beta hemoglobin RNA transcripts were added to reduce globin RNA transcription due to RBC. The inhibition of globin cDNA synthesis dramatically reduces the relative amount of anti-sense, biotin-labeled cRNA corresponding to the hemoglobin transcripts. Hybridization and microarray data collection was performed using the Human Genome U133A 2.0 Array (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) and expression profiles were pre-processed using robust multi-array (RMA) method

PLATFORM
GPL9188 Affymetrix GeneChip Human Genome U133A 2.0 Array [CDF: Brainarray Version 10, Hs133Av2_Hs_ENTREZG]

CITATIONS
21901105

