TITLE
Leukocytes Gene Expression in Correlation to Plasma Lipid Levels

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background---For decades, plasma lipid levels have been known risk factors of atherosclerosis. Recently, inflammation has gained acceptance as a crucial event in the pathogenesis and development of atherosclerosis. A number of studies have provided some insights into the relationships between the two aspects of atherosclerosis: plasma lipids --- the risk factors, and circulating leukocytes --- the effectors of inflammation.  In this study, we investigate the relationships between plasma lipids and leukocytes. Methods and Results---No significant correlation was found between leukocyte counts and plasma lipid levels in 74 individuals. Profiling and analyzing the leukocyte gene expression of 32 individuals revealed distinctive patterns in response to plasma lipid levels: 1) genes involved in lipid metabolism and in the electron transport chain were positively correlated with triglycerides and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels, and negatively correlated with high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels; 2) genes involved in platelet activation were negatively correlated with high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels; 3) transcription factors regulating lipidgenesis-related genes were correlated with plasma lipid levels; 4) a number of genes correlated to plasma lipid levels were found located in the regions of known QTLs associated with hyperlipemia. Conclusions--- We discovered interesting patterns of leukocyte gene expression in response to plasma lipid levels. Most importantly, genes involved in lipid metabolism, the electron transportation chain, and platelet activation were found correlated with plasma lipid levels. We suggest that leukocytes respond to changing plasma lipid levels by regulating a network of genes, including genes involved in lipid and fatty acid metabolism, through the activation of key transcription factors, such as sterol regulatory element binding transcription factors and peroxisome proliferative activated receptors. Keywords: Atherosclerosis, leukocyte, lipid, gene expression

DESIGN
1. Profile gene expression in human peripheral blood cells. 2. Test blood biochemistry and blood cell differential counts 3. Examine the correlation between blood gene expression and blood lipid levels. 4. Explore possible pathways with significant genes. 5. Validate a number of significant genes with RT-PCR

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
16806233

