TITLE
Expression data from parietal cortex of G114V genetic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease patient

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The familial or genetic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (fCJD or gCJD) is the inherent form of human prion diseases, which accounts for approximately 10-15% of human prion diseases that are caused by mutations of the prion protein gene (PRNP). In this study, the global expression patterns of the parietal cortex from a patient with G114V gCJD were comparatively analyzed with the normal controls by using a commercial human genome expression chip. Totally 8774 genes showed differential expression, among them 2769 genes were upregulated and 6005 ones were downregulated. The reliability of the results was confirmed by the real-time RT-PCR assays for several specific genes. The most differentially expressed genes involved in the functions of regulation of transcription, ion transport, transcription, cell adhesion, signal transduction. The gene associated with gliosis was upregulated and the genes marked for neurons were downregulated, while the transcription of PRNP gene maintained unchanged. 169 different pathways showed significantly changed in the brain of G114V gCJD. The most significantly regulated pathways included that of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease, oxidative phosphorylation, regulation of actin cytoskeleton, MAPK signaling pathway and proteasome, which were described in prion diseases previously. In addition, some rarely addressed pathways in prion diseases, such as axon guidance, gap junction and purine metabolism, were also significantly changed in G114V gCJD. The transcriptional situations of the most genes in the top ten changed pathways were down-regulated. The extensive reductions of gene expressions in G114V gCJD showed the comparable profiles with sporadic CJD. The data here raised the useful clues for understanding the pathogenesis of the disease and selecting the potential biomarkers for diagnostic and therapeutic tools.

DESIGN
Brain tissues of parietal cortex from a definitely diagnosed G114V gCJD were enrolled into this study. The patient was a 47-year-old Han-Chinese woman at the onset. Neuropathological assays of ten different brain regions revealed typical sCJD-like abnormality and PrPSc deposits. Meanwhile, a commercial normal human parietal cortex total RNA (Clontech) pooled from four male/female aged 35-89 was utilized as control.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

