TITLE
Microarray profiling reveals Integrated Stress Response is activated by Halofuginone in mammary epithelial cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The small molecule Halofuginone (HF) is a potent regulator of extracellular matrix (ECM ) gene expression and is unique in its therapeutic potential.  While the basis for HF effects is unknown, inhibition of TGFb signaling and activation of the AAR have been linked to HF transcriptional control of a number of ECM components and amelioration of fibrosis and alleviation of autoimmune disease by regulation of Th17 cell differentiation, respectively.  The aim of this study was to generate a global expression profile of HF targets in epithelial cells to identify potential mediators of HF function in this cell type.  We report that HF modulation of the ECM remodeling protein Mmp13 in epithelial cells is separable from previously reported effects of HF on TGFß signal inhibition, and use microarray expression analysis to correlate this with transcriptional responses characteristic of the Integrated Stress Response (ISR).  Our findings suggest a common mechanism underlying HF anti-fibrotic and anti-angiogenic effects in parenchymal cells and HF effects on Th17 differentiation.  Moreover, our results point away from a central role of TGFb signaling in the HF mechanism of action and suggest a new approach to small molecule based regulation of the ECM transcriptional program in vivo.

DESIGN
NMuMG mammary epithelial cells were treated with 10 nM Halofuginone or 10 nM MAZ1310 (a non-functional analog of Halofuginone used as a control) for 8 hours.  Each treatment was performed in biological triplicate.  Following RNA extraction, we used Phalanx Mouse Whole Genome OneArray to measure mRNA abundance of Halofuginone-treated and MAZ1310 control samples.  Each array was performed in triplicate. Expression of transcripts in Halofuginone versus MAZ1310 treated cells was examined.

PLATFORM
GPL6845 Phalanx Mouse OneArray

CITATIONS
21974968

