TITLE
ETV5 Mediated Downstream Gene Activation in Spermatogonial Stem Cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Insight into mechanisms controlling gene expression in the spermatogonial stem cell (SSC) will improve our understanding of the processes regulating spermatogenesis and aid in treating problems associated with male infertility. In this study we explored the global gene expression profiles of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) regulated transcription factors, Ets variant gene 5 (Etv5), B-cell CLL/lymphoma 6, member B (Bcl6b) and POU domain, class-3 transcription factor-1 (Pou3f1). We reasoned that these three factors may function as a core-set of transcription factors, regulating genes responsible for maintaining the SSC population. Using transient short-interfering RNA oligonucleotides (siRNA) to individually target Etv5, Bcl6b and Pou3f1 within mouse SSC cultures, we examined changes to the global gene expression profiles associated with these transcription factors. While there were only modest overlaps in the target genes regulated by the three factors, ETV5 was found to be a critical downstream regulator of GDNF signaling that mediated the expression of several known SSC self-renewal related genes including, Bcl6b  and LIM homeobox 1 (Lhx1). Notably, ETV5 was identified as a regulator of Brachyury and CXC chemokine Receptor, type 4 (Cxcr4), and we show that ETV5 binding to the Brachyury gene promoter region is associated with an active state of transcription. Moreover, in vivo transplantation of SSCs following silencing of Brachyury significantly reduced the number of donor cell-derived colonies formed within recipient mouse testes. These results suggest Brachury is of biological importance, and functions as part of GDNF/ETV5 signaling to promote self-renewal of mouse SSCs cultured in vitro.

DESIGN
Microarray gene expression analysis was conducted with Affymetrix Mouse 430 2.0 GeneChips (Affymetrix Inc.).Following with gene knockdown, total RNA from spermatogonial stem cells  was converted to cDNA.  There are total 16 samples (Four groups and four samples per group) Negative control (N), Bcl6b Knockdown (B), Etv5 knockdown (E), and Pou3f1 knockdown (O), respectively.

