TITLE
A cost-effective method for double stranded cDNA synthesis for microarray analysis

ORGANISM
Cucumis melo

SUMMARY
DNA microarrays are two-dimensional arrangements of specific probes deposited on a substrate that have been widely used in gene expression analysis by measuring mRNA accumulation. The use of this type of microarrays involves the synthesis of cDNA, which has to be double stranded (ds) if the microarray probes are of the positive strand. We have used a custom-synthesized non-commercial NimbleGen microarray from melon to evaluate an alternative method of ds cDNA synthesis, which differs substantially in its economical cost relative to a widely recommended method. The results suggested that both methods produce cDNA representative of the melon transcriptome to a similar extent, indicating that the alternative technique provides a cheaper method of ds cDNA synthesis for microarray gene expression assays.

DESIGN
Recently, we have analyzed the transcriptome of melon in response to WMV infection. Cotyledons of two genotypes of melon were virus inoculated and transcriptomic responses to the infection were analyzed by comparing infected and mock inoculated samples at 1, 3, and 7 days post-inoculation (dpi). Three biological replicates were performed for each sample. Double stranded cDNA was obtained with the Double stranded cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), based on the nick translation approach (Mol. Cell. Biol (1982) 2:161-170; Gene (1983) 25:263-269). Raw and processed microarray data are freely available from GEO database under the accession number GSE30111. By using this set of microarray hybridizations as a reference, RNA corresponding to infected cotyledons replicate 3 at 1 dpi (A1) and replicate 1 at 3 dpi (A2) (GEO accession numbers GSM745566 and GSM745567) were used to perform cDNA synthesis by the alternative method (samples B1 and B2, respectively), based on the SMART approach (BioTechniques (2001) 30:892-897), and microarray data were compared.

