TITLE
Effect of folate supplementation on gastric tissue in INS-GAS Helicobacter felis-infected mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background & Aims: Previous studies have suggested that dietary folic acid (FA) can protect against certain types of cancers.  However, the findings have varied and the mechanisms by which this vitamin exerts chemopreventive effects remain to be clarified.  We examined the effects of FA supplementation on DNA methylation, gene expression and gastric dysplasia in a transgenic mouse model that is etiologically and histologically well matched with human gastric cancers. Methods: Hypergastrinemic mice (INS-GAS) infected with Helicobacter felis were studied at multiple stages of gastric dysplasia and early cancer, with FA supplementation initiated both at weaning and later in life.  Global DNA methylation was assessed by a methylation-sensitive cytosine incorporation assay, bisulfite pyrosequencing of B1 repetitive elements and immunohistochemistry (IHC) with anti-5-methylcytosine.  We also profiled gene expression in the same tissues. Results: We found a decrease in global DNA methylation and tissue folate and an increase in serum homocysteine with progression of gastric dysplasia.  FA supplementation prevented this loss of global DNA methylation and markedly reduced gastric dysplasia and mucosal inflammation.  FA protected against the loss of global DNA methylation both in the dysplastic gastric epithelial cells and in gastric stromal myofibroblasts.  In addition, FA supplementation had an anti-inflammatory effect, as indicated by expression profiling and IHC for lymphocyte markers. Conclusions: We conclude that FA supplementation is chemopreventive in this model of Helicobacter-associated gastric cancer.  The beneficial effect of FA is likely due to its ability to reverse global loss of methylation and suppress inflammation.

DESIGN
Study the difference in gene expression between transgenic hypergastrinemic (INS-GAS) mice fed a folate-supplemented diet and a diet with normal folate content.  Because folate had a substantial protective effect, we matched the animals not only by folate status but also by dysplasia score (DYS).  The degree of dysplasia was scored on a 1-4 scale.  True replicates are not included. The first five samples are from folate supplemented animals, and the latter five are from controls on regular chow. The times refer to the number of weeks after infection with H. felis that the animals were switched to a folate-supplemented diet.

PLATFORM
GPL13302 University at Buffalo Illumina MouseWG-6 v2.0 expression beadchip (Gene version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

