TITLE
Effect of Continuous Suppression of Heparan Sulfate during Flow on Arterial Endothelial Function

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
The arterial endothelium’s response to its flow environment is critical to vascular homeostasis. The endothelial glycocalyx has been shown to play a major role in mechanotransduction, but the extent to which the components of the glycocalyx affect the overall function of the endothelium remains unclear. The objective of this study was to further elucidate the role of heparan sulfate as a mechanosensor on the surface of the arterial endothelium, by (1) expanding the variety of shear waveforms investigated, (2) continuously suppressing heparan sulfate expression rather than using a pre-flow batch treatment, and (3) performing microarray analysis on post-flow samples. Porcine aortic endothelial cells were exposed to non-reversing, reversing, and oscillatory shear waveforms for 24 hours with or without continuous heparan sulfate suppression with heparinase. All shear waveforms significantly increased the amount of heparan sulfate on the surface of the endothelium. Suppression of heparan sulfate to less than 25% of control levels did not inhibit shear-induced cell alignment or nitric oxide production, or alter gene expression, for any of the shear waveforms investigated. We infer that heparan sulfate on the surface of porcine aortic endothelial cells is not the primary mechanosensor for many shear-responsive endothelial cell functions in this species.

DESIGN
Porcine aortic endothelial cells were exposed to 3 different shear waveforms for 24 hours with or without the addition of 300 mU/ml heparinase III to the flow media. The shear waveforms inculded Non-reversing (15 ± 15 dyne/cm2, 1 Hz), Steady (15 dyne/cm2), or Oscillatory (0 ± 15 dyne/cm2, 1 Hz) shear. Four replicates of each condition were performed for a total of 24 experiments. Each experimental sample was hybridized to an oligonucleotide array along with a standard reference sample (static cells).

PLATFORM
GPL3461 Duke Operon Porcine 10.5K Oligo Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

