TITLE
Establishment of Enhancer Repertoires that Orchestrate the Myeloid and Lymphoid Cell Fates (ChIP-Seq dataset)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Recent studies have documented genome-wide binding patterns of transcriptional regulators and their associated epigenetic marks in hematopoietic cell lineages. In order to determine how epigenetic marks are established and maintained during developmental progression, we have generated long-term cultures of hematopoietic progenitors by enforcing the expression of the E-protein antagonist Id2. Hematopoietic progenitors that express Id2 are multipotent and readily differentiate upon withdrawal of Id2 expression into committed B lineage cells, thus indicating a causative role for E2A in promoting the B cell fate. Genome-wide analyses revealed that a substantial fraction of lymphoid and myeloid enhancers are pre-marked by H3K4me1 in multipotent progenitors. However, H3K4me1 levels at a subset of enhancers are elevated during developmental progression, resulting in evolving enhancer repertoires that we propose orchestrate the myeloid and B cell fates.

DESIGN
ChIP-Seq and gene expression profiling were performed in an inducible hematopoietic pluripotent cell line that can be differentiated into multiple lymphoid lineages. This submission contains ChIP-Seq data. Recent studies have demonstrated a tight correlation between transcriptionally active promoters and H3K4 trimethylation, whereas H3K4 monomethylation has been associated with enhancer activity. To determine whether the changes in gene expression patterns upon differentiation correlate with the presence of H3K4me3 as well as H3K4me1, ChIP-sequencing was performed on these two marks on cell lysates that were derived from Id2-HPCs and differentiated Id2-HPCs. The H3K4me1 marks were further analyzed to investigate the dynamics of enhancer repertoires between these cells. Id2-HPCs were cultured in IMDM medium supplemented with 10% FCS/2% PSG/β-me and IL7, Flt3-ligand, and SCF cytokines on S17 feeder cells in a humidified incubator at 37 degrees C with 5% CO2. Id2-HPC expanded cells were depleted of small ( < 1-5%) numbers of CD19-, CD25- and CD11b-positive cells by auto-MACS. For myeloid differentiation, cells were cultured for up to 6 days in IMDM medium supplemented with 10% FCS/2% PSG/β-me and IL3, Flt3L, GMCSF and MCSF cytokines. To promote B-cell differentiation, cells were cultured for up to 5 days in IMDM medium supplemented with 10% FCS/2% PSG/β-me and IL-7 and SCF cytokines on S17 feeder cells in the presence of 1 ug/mL doxycycline, or alternatively, in alpha-MEM medium in the presence of cytokines and on Tst-4 stromal cells.

PLATFORM
GPL9250 Illumina Genome Analyzer II (Mus musculus) GPL11002 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
21903424

