TITLE
Comparative genomic hybridization analysis shows different epidemiology of chromosomal and plasmid-borne cpe-carrying Clostridium perfringens type A strains

ORGANISM
Clostridium perfringens

SUMMARY
Enterotoxin-producing C. perfringens type A is a common cause of food poisonings. The cpe encoding the enterotoxin can be chromosomal (genotype IS1470) or plasmid-borne (genotypes IS1470-like-cpe or IS1151-cpe). The chromosomal cpe-carrying C. perfringens are a more common cause of food poisonings than plasmid-borne cpe-genotypes. The chromosomal cpe-carrying C. perfringens type A strains are generally more resistant to most food-processing conditions than plasmid-borne cpe-carrying strains. On the other hand, the plasmid-borne cpe-positive genotypes are more commonly found in human feces than chromosomal cpe-positive genotypes, and humans seem to be a reservoir for plasmid-borne cpe-carrying strains. Thus, it is possible that the epidemiology of C. perfringes type A food poisonings caused by plasmid-borne and chromosomal cpe-carrying strains is different. A DNA microarray was designed for analysis of genetic relatedness between the different cpe-positive and cpe-negative genotypes of C. perfringens strains isolated from human, animal, environmental  and food samples. The DNA microarray contained two probes for all protein-coding sequences in the three genome-sequenced strains (C. perfringens type A strains 13, ATCC13124, and SM101). The chromosomal and plasmid-borne C. perfringens genotypes were grouped into two distinct clusters, one consisting of the chromosomal cpe-genotypes and the other consisting of plasmid-borne cpe-genotypes. Analysis of the variable gene pool complemented with the growth studies demonstrate different carbohydrate and amine metabolism in the chromosomal and plasmid-borne cpe-carrying strains, suggesting different epidemiology of the cpe-positive C. perfringens strain groups.

DESIGN
Array CGH. Two-color hybridizations on 8x15K Agilent arrays. Eight reference strain hybridizations. Normalization was based on log-ratios against the reference strain. For each sample, 8 normalization factors were calculated, one against each reference hybridization, and the median normalization factor was used. This was repeated for each sample hybridization separately.

