TITLE
Transcriptome profiling of low temperature-treated cassava apical shoots reveals dynamic responses of a tropical plant to cold stress

ORGANISM
Manihot esculenta

SUMMARY
Background: Cassava is an important tropical root crop adapted to a wide range of environmental stimuli such as drought and acid soils. Nevertheless, it is an extremely cold-sensitive tropical species. Thus far, there is limited information about gene regulation and signaling pathways related to the cold stress response in cassava. The development of microarray technology has accelerated the study of global transcription profiling under certain conditions. Results: A 60-mer oligonucleotide 4X44K Agilent microarray representing 20,840 genes was used to perform transcriptome profiling in cassava apical shoots subjected to cold at 7°C for 0 h, 4 h, and 9 h. A total of 508 transcripts were identified as early cold-responsive genes in which 319 sequences had descriptions when they were aligned with Arabidopsis proteins. Gene ontology (GO) annotation analysis identified many interesting categories including ‘Response to abiotic and biotic stimulus’, ‘Response to stress’, ‘Transcription factor activity’, and ‘Chloroplast’. Various stress-associated genes comprising signal transduction components (e.g., MAP kinase 4), transcription factors (TFs; e.g., RAP2.11), and ROS scavenging enzymes (e.g., catalase 2), as well as photosynthesis-related genes (e.g., PSAL), were found. Seventeen major TF families were also identified as being involved in the early response to cold stress (e.g., AP2-EREBP). Meanwhile, KEGG pathway analysis uncovered many important pathways, including ‘Plant hormone signal transduction’, ‘Starch and sucrose metabolism’, and ‘Plant-pathogen interaction’. Furthermore, the expression changes of 18 genes under cold and other abiotic stresses conditions were validated by real-time RT-PCR. As a response to cold stress in cassava, an increase in the ROS scavenging enzyme activities of catalase and superoxide dismutases and the accumulation of total soluble sugars were also detected. Importantly, most of the tested stress-responsive genes were primarily expressed in mature leaves, stem cambia, and fibrous roots rather than apical buds and young leaves. Conclusions: The dynamic expression changes reflect the integrative controlling and transcriptome regulation of the networks in the early cold stress response of cassava. The biological processes involved in the signal perception and physiological response might shed light on the molecular mechanisms related to cold tolerance in tropical plants and provide useful candidate genes for genetic improvement.

DESIGN
Apical shoots subjected to cold at 7°C for 0 h, 4 h, and 9 h were collected for RNA extractions from three independent healthy 3-month-old cassava (cultivar TMS60444) plants in the greenhouse.

PLATFORM
GPL11271 SIPPE Cassava 44k v1.0

CITATIONS
22321773

