TITLE
Transcript profiles of PFAAs in trout liver

ORGANISM
Oncorhynchus mykiss

SUMMARY
Background: Previously, we reported that perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) promotes liver cancer in manner similar to that of 17β-estradiol (E2) in rainbow trout. Also, other perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) are weakly estrogenic in trout and bind the trout liver estrogen receptor (ER). Objectives: The primary objective of this study was to determine whether multiple PFAAs enhance hepatic tumorigenesis in trout, an animal model that represents human insensitivity to peroxisome proliferators. Methods: A two-stage chemical carcinogenesis model was employed in trout to evaluate PFOA, perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA), perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA), perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) and 8:2 fluorotelomer alcohol (8:2FtOH) as complete carcinogens or promoters of aflatoxin B1 (AFB1)- and/or N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG)-induced liver cancer. A custom trout DNA microarray was used to assess hepatic transcriptional response to these dietary treatments in comparison to E2 and the classic peroxisome proliferator clofibrate (CLOF).  Results: Incidence, multiplicity and size of liver tumors in trout fed diets containing E2, PFOA, PFNA and PFDA were significantly higher compared to AFB1-initiated animals fed control diet, whereas PFOS caused a minor increase in liver tumor incidence. E2 and PFOA also enhanced MNNG-initiated hepatocarcinogenesis. Pearson correlation analyses, unsupervised hierarchical clustering and principal components analyses showed that the hepatic gene expression profiles for E2 and PFOA, PFNA, PFDA and PFOS were overall highly similar, though distinct patterns of gene expression were evident for each treatment, particularly for PFNA. Conclusions: Overall, these data suggest that multiple PFAAs can promote liver cancer and that the mechanism of promotion may be similar to that for E2.

DESIGN
A total of 40 samples were analyzed using a a dye-swap, reference sample hybridization protocol.  Rainbow trout were exposed to the following experimental treatments via the diet for two weeks (number in parenthesis is assigned group #): (1) Control; (2) 5 mg/kg diet estradiol (E2); (3) 2000 mg/kg diet perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA); (4) 2000 mg/kg diet perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA); (5) 2000 mg/kg diet perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA); (6) 200 mg/kg diet perfluorooctane sulfonate; (7) 2000 mg/kg 8:2 fluorotelomer alcohol (FTOH); and (8) 2000 mg/kg diet clofibrate.  A total of 40 total hepatic mRNA samples were analyzed using a dye-swap, reference sample hybridization protocol.  A reference RNA pool was made by combining equal amounts of RNA from all control RNA samples, with one exception. A separate time-matched reference pool was utilized for group 6 samples (PFOS treatment).  Five hybridizations were performed for each treatment group in the following pattern: Replicate A Cy5/Reference Cy3; Replicate A Cy3/Reference Cy 5; Replicate B Cy5/Reference Cy3; Replicate B Cy3/Reference Cy5; Replicate C Cy5/Reference Cy3. Thus, the experiment consisted of three biological replicates, for two of which were replicated technically.

PLATFORM
GPL5478 OSUrbt Oncorhynchus mykiss 1.6K v2.0 update 07.05.07

CITATIONS
21984479

