TITLE
Shoot tip tissue: Tall Mokka vs Typica.

ORGANISM
Coffea arabica

SUMMARY
The closely related Coffea arabica cultivars ‘Tall Mokka’ and ‘Typica’, with excellent flavor, but differing distinctively in the size of aerial organs, branching pattern and branch numbers. Differential gene expression analysis of shoot tips of arabica coffee cultivars 'Tall Mokka' and 'Typica' were done using Potato cDNA microarray as cross-species platform. Using cross-species microarray hybridization, we identified a prolyl oligopeptidase (CaPOP) gene as differentially expressed between the shoot tips of ‘Tall Mokka’ and ‘Typica’. Isolation and sequencing of POP genes from coffee identified three paralogs, CaPOP1, CaPOP2 and CaPOP3. All three genes were present in both cultivars, which suggest that differences in the expression of CaPOP are caused by factor(s) regulating the transcription of CaPOPs. CaPOP1 differs in sequence from CaPOP2 primarily in having two large deletions in the promoter region. CaPOP genes are homologous to arabidopsis At1g20380, encoding a post-proline cleaving enzyme that acts on substrates shorter than 30 amino acids. Ectopic expression of CaPOP1 under its native promoter in transgenic arabidopsis resulted in more secondary branches than in the wild type. This is the first study to successfully isolate CaPOP genes and characterize their expression in the developing tissues of coffee. This study also identified a novel role for prolyl oligopeptidase in control of branching.

DESIGN
Eight coffee trees of 'Typica' ('K') and six trees of 'Tall Mokka' ('M') cultivar were used in this study. The trees were equally divided into two groups 'A' and 'B' for each cultivar ('MA','MB', 'KA' and 'KB') and treated as biological replicates. Eight two channel microarray hybridizations were done in following pairs: MA x KA, MA x KB, MB x KA, MB x KB and dye swap replicate of each pair. Summary: Two-sample experiment: Tall Mokka vs. Typica . 8 Hybridizations. 2 Biological replicates per sample. 1 Dye swap per array.

PLATFORM
GPL14110 Potato 10k cDNA array version 4 (CLONE_ID version)

CITATIONS
Characterization of Prolyl Oligopeptidase Genes Differentially Expressed Between Two Cultivars of Coffea arabica. Ratnesh Singh, Beth Irikura, Chifumi Nagai, Henrik H. Albert, Monto Kumagai, Robert E. Paull, Paul H. Moore and Ming-Li Wang. Url: http://www.springerlink.com/content/pt647h233878461m/. Doi: 10.1007/s12042-011-9082-5. Tropical Plant Biology.

