TITLE
Identification of small non coding RNAs in S. pyognes M49  using intergenic tiling arrays

ORGANISM
Streptococcus pyogenes M49 591

SUMMARY
Small non-coding RNAs (sRNAs) have attracted attention as a new class of gene regulators in eukaryotes and in bacteria. In this study, we identified novel sRNAs of  the human pathogen Streptococcus pyogenes M49 (GAS M49). A temporal expression profile of potential sRNAs was determined for (GAS M49). Cells were grown in chemical defined medium (CDM), Todd-Hewitt broth (Invitrogen) supplemented with 0.5% yeast extract (THY) or Brain-Heart-Infusion (BHI) complex medium using tiling arrays representing the intergenic regions of the GAS M49 genome. We identified 55 putative sRNAs in GAS M49 that were expressed during growth. Of those, 35 sRNAs were novel, whereas 20 sRNAs were known. Already described sRNAs included molecules belonging to one of the common non-coding RNA families covered by the rfam collection and streptococcal sRNAs that have been detected in previous studies. Comparison to a recently published bioinformatics screen showed a low overlap between putative sRNA genes. This is in accordance with the results from other studies, which underlines the fact that a comprehensive analysis of sRNAs expressed by a given organism requires the complementary use of different methods and the investigation of several environmental conditions. Despite a high conservation of sRNA genes within streptococci, the expression of sRNAs is rather strain specific.

DESIGN
Identification of sncRNA candidates transcribed by S. pyogenes was undertaken with bacteria from cultures grown to exponential (OD600: 0.4) and stationary (OD600: 1.2) phase of growth and each for three growth media. For samples from bacteria grown in CDM medium four biological replicates were included, for samples from bacteria grown in THY and BHI medium two biological replicates were included.

PLATFORM
GPL14116 Febit_IMIKRO_Streptococcus_pyogenes_16K_v1

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

