TITLE
Microarray-based transcriptomic analysis of differences between long-term gregarious and solitarious desert locusts

ORGANISM
Schistocerca gregaria

SUMMARY
Desert locusts (Schistocerca gregaria) show an extreme form of phenotypic plasticity and can transform between a cryptic solitarious phase and a swarming gregarious phase. The two phases differ extensively in behavior, morphology and physiology but very little is known about the molecular basis of these differences. We used our recently generated Expressed Sequence Tag (EST) database derived from S. gregaria central nervous system (CNS) to design oligonucleotide microarrays and compare the expression of thousands of genes in the CNS of long-term gregarious and solitarious adult desert locusts. This identified 214 differentially expressed genes, of which 40% have been annotated to date. These include genes encoding proteins that are associated with CNS development and modeling, sensory perception, stress response and resistance, and fundamental cellular processes. Our microarray analysis has identified genes whose altered expression may enable locusts of either phase to deal with the different challenges they face. Genes for heat shock proteins and proteins which confer protection from infection were upregulated in gregarious locusts, which may allow them to respond to acute physiological challenges. By contrast the longer-lived solitarious locusts appear to be more strongly protected from the slowly accumulating effects of ageing by an upregulation of genes related to anti-oxidant systems, detoxification and anabolic renewal. Gregarious locusts also had a greater abundance of transcripts for proteins involved in sensory processing and in nervous system development and plasticity. Gregarious locusts live in a more complex sensory environment than solitarious locusts and may require a greater turnover of proteins involved in sensory transduction, and possibly greater neuronal plasticity.

DESIGN
Two condition experiment: Solitarious central nervous system (CNS) vs gregarious CNS. 6 biological repeats per condition, balanced over 3 male and 3 females samples. The overall experimental design consisted of two identical repeats of an n+2 A-optimal design, organized per sex (n=6 per sex, 3 solitarious - 3 gregarious samples)

PLATFORM
GPL11172 Agilent-023462 Desert and Migratory Locust EST Array

CITATIONS
22132225

