TITLE
Fingerprinting the Asterid species using subtracted diversity array reveals novel species-specific sequences.

ORGANISM
Embryophyta ; Digitalis purpurea ; Sambucus nigra ; Cornus ; Camellia sinensis ; Achillea millefolium ; Coffea arabica ; Codonopsis ; Valeriana officinalis ; Impatiens ; Angelica archangelica ; Tetrapanax papyrifer ; Taraxacum officinale ; Vitex agnus-castus ; Trachelospermum jasminoides ; asterids ; Scrophularia nodosa ; Platycodon grandiflorus ; Rehmannia glutinosa ; Lonicera japonica ; Lycium barbarum ; Gardenia jasminoides ; Forsythia suspensa ; Withania somnifera ; Ilex paraguariensis ; Symphytum ; Leonurus cardiaca

SUMMARY
Asterids is one of the major plant clades comprising of many commercially important medicinal species. One of the major concerns in medicinal plant industry is adulteration/contamination resulting from misidentification of herbal plants. This study reports the construction and validation of a microarray capable of fingerprinting medicinally important species from the Asterids clade.

DESIGN
DNA of 104 non-asterid angiosperm and non-angiosperm species was subtracted from pooled genomic DNA of 67 asterid species. 283 subtracted DNA fragments were used to construct an Asterid-specific array. The validation of Asterid-specific array revealed a high (99.5%) subtraction efficiency. 25 Asterid species (mostly medicinal) representing 20 families and 9 orders within the clade were hybridized onto the array to reveal its level of species discrimination. All these species could be successfully differentiated using their hybridization patterns. A number of species-specific probes were identified for commercially important species like tea, coffee, dandelion, yarrow, motherwort, Japanese honeysuckle, valerian, wild celery, and yerba mate. 37 polymorphic probes were characterized by sequencing. A large number of probes were novel species-specific probes whilst some of them were from chloroplast region including genes like atpB, rpoB, and ndh that have extensively been used for fingerprinting and phylogenetic analysis of plants.

PLATFORM
GPL14119 Asterids-specific array

CITATIONS
22496874

