TITLE
Gene Expression Profiling of Primary Male Breast Cancers Reveals Two Unique Subgroups and Identifies N-acetyltransferase-1 (NAT1) as a Novel Prognostic Biomarker

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Male breast cancer (MBC) is a rare and inadequately characterized disease. The aim of the present study was to characterize MBC tumors transcriptionally, to classify them into comprehensive subgroups, and to compare them with female breast cancer (FBC). Methods: Sixty-six clinicopathologically well-annotated fresh frozen MBC tumors were analyzed using Illumina Human HT-12 bead arrays, and a tissue microarray with 220 MBC tumors was constructed for validation using immunohistochemistry. Two external gene expression datasets were used for comparison purposes; 37 MBCs and 359 FBCs. Results: Using an unsupervised approach, we classified the MBC tumors into two subgroups, luminal M1 and luminal M2, respectively, with differences in tumor biological features and outcome, and which differed from the intrinsic subgroups described in FBC. The two subgroups were recapitulated in the external MBCs dataset. Luminal M2 tumors were characterized by high expression of immune response genes and genes associated with estrogen receptor (ER) signaling. Luminal M1 tumors, on the other hand, despite being ER positive by immunohistochemistry showed a lower correlation to genes associated with ER signaling and displayed a more aggressive phenotype and worse prognosis. Validation of two of the most differentially expressed genes, class 1 human leukocyte antigen (HLA) and the metabolizing gene N-acetyltransferase-1 (NAT1), respectively, revealed significantly better survival associated with high expression of both markers (HLA, hazard ratio (HR) 3.6, P=0.002; NAT1, HR 2.5, P=0.033). Importantly, NAT1 remained significant in a multivariate analysis (HR 2.8, P=0.040) and may thus be a novel prognostic marker in MBC. Conclusions: We have detected two unique and stable subgroups of MBC with differences in tumor biological features and outcome. They differ from the widely acknowledged intrinsic subgroups of FBC. As such they may constitute two novel subgroups of breast cancer, occurring exclusively in men, and which may consequently require novel treatment approaches. Finally, we identified NAT1 as a possible prognostic biomarker for MBC, as suggested by NAT1 positivity corresponding to better outcome.

DESIGN
Total RNA was extracted from 66 male breast cancer samples and were hybridized to Human HT-12 v3.0 Expression BeadChips in three batches at the SCIBLU Genomics Center at Lund University. Four samples each from hybridization batches one and two were re-hybridized in the third batch, resulting in a total of 74 experiments.

PLATFORM
GPL6947 Illumina HumanHT-12 V3.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
22333393

