TITLE
Gene expression changes in murine ileum during inflammation: Controls vs. intestinal schistosomiasis and TNBS-ileitis.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background: Although a number of intestinal inflammatory conditions pertain to the ileum, whole-genome gene expression analyses on ileal inflammation in animal models are lacking to date. Therefore, we aimed to identify and characterize alterations in gene expression in the acutely inflamed ileum of two murine models of intestinal inflammation, namely intestinal schistosomiasis and TNBS-induced ileitis, using Agilent whole-genome microarrays followed by bioinformatics analysis to detect enrichment of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways and Gene Ontology categories. Results: When compared with healthy control mice, of almost all known mouse genes and transcripts represented on the array, intestinal schistosomiasis and TNBS-induced ileitis yielded 207 and 1417 differential genes respectively, with 48 overlapping genes (adj.p.value < 0.1 and log2FC > 1 or < 1). Complement and coagulation cascades, extracellular matrix-receptor interaction, Fc epsilon receptor I signaling pathways and protein activation cascade, cell adhesion categories were enriched for differential genes in intestinal schistosomiasis. Antigen processing and presentation, cell adhesion molecules, ABC transporters, Toll-like receptor signaling pathways and response to chemical stimulus categories were enriched for differential genes in TNBS-induced ileitis. Although cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, intestinal immune network for immunoglobulin A production, focal adhesion pathways and immune, inflammatory and defense response categories were enriched for differential genes in both inflammation models, the vast majority of the associated differential genes were unique to each model. Conclusions: This study characterized the two diverse models of ileal inflammation at a whole-genome level and outlined their underlying molecular heterogeneity. The results indicate that intestinal schistosomiasis involves Th2 responses, enhanced tissue repair and complement activation, while TNBS-induced ileitis involves Th17 responses, defective antigen processing and presentation and altered Toll-like receptor-mediated responses. Epithelial barrier impairment seems to occur in both inflammation models. Moreover, the comprehensive differential gene-list provided by this study would be helpful as a starting point to explore a specific novel pathway in more detail dealing with small bowel inflammation.

DESIGN
A total of 9 biological samples containing 3 each of Control, S.mansoni-infected and TNBS-treated were included in the study. A reference design was used including a reference sample containing a pool of equimolar amounts of all Control samples. The design consisted totally of 11 arrays which included 3 biological replicates each of Control (labeled in Cy5),  S.mansoni-infected (labeled in Cy3) and  TNBS-treated tissue samples(labeled in Cy5) as well as two dye flipped technical replicates of a Control  and a  S.mansoni-infected  tissue sample. The reference was labeled with either Cy5 or Cy3, depending on the labeling of the test sample.

PLATFORM
GPL14111 Agilent Mouse 44K custom high-definition whole-genome oligo array

CITATIONS
22866923

