TITLE
Androgen receptor function links human sexual dimorphism to DNA methylation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
To decipher hormonal from chromosomal factors we compared DNA-methylation of 27,568 CpG-loci in genital fibroblasts from 46,XY feminized individuals (AIS) with inactivating androgen receptor mutations to those of normal males. The results of the following two subset comparisons are linked to the Series record below: CpG loci differentially methylated (q < 0.04) between AIS and male controls (primary human genital fibroblasts): To decipher hormonal from chromosomal factors we compared DNA-methylation of 27,568 CpG-loci in genital fibroblasts from 46,XY feminized individuals (AIS) with inactivating androgen receptor mutations to those of normal males. Cell culture of primary fibroblasts from scrotum/ labia majora from donors with PAIS (n=13), MAIS (n=1) or CAIS (n=13) and 9 controls were analyzed using the HumanMethylation27 Bead Chip. 13 AIS samples and all controls were analyzed in duplicates. Samples with gene call rates < 95% as analyzed with BeadStudio software (Illumina, Inc.) and CpGs with detection p-values > 0.05 in at least one experiment were excluded from analyses. 54 hybridizations with 25,988 CpGs entered the analysis. Differential methylation analysis (DMA) was performed based on average beta-values were performed using OMICS Explorer (v.2.1(25); Qlucore, Sweden). This file contains CpG loci found differentially methylated (q < 0.04) by this approach. CpG loci characterized by a high varibility in their DNA methylation value in AIS compared to male controls (primary human genital fibroblasts): To decipher hormonal from chromosomal factors we compared DNA-methylation of 27,568 CpG-loci in genital fibroblasts from 46,XY feminized individuals (AIS) with inactivating androgen receptor mutations to those of normal males. Cell culture of primary fibroblasts from scrotum/ labia majora from donors with PAIS (n=13), MAIS (n=1) or CAIS (n=13) and 9 controls were analyzed using the HumanMethylation27 Bead Chip. 13 AIS samples and all controls were analyzed in duplicates. Samples with gene call rates < 95% as analyzed with BeadStudio software (Illumina, Inc.) and CpGs with detection p-values > 0.05 in at least one experiment were excluded from analyses. 54 hybridizations with 25,988 CpGs entered the analysis. CpG loci with beta-values ranged in control samples up to 0.34 and a difference of the interquartiles between controls and AIS samples above 0.16 were considered as being variably methylated in AIS and are included in this file.

DESIGN
Bisulphite converted DNA from the 62 samples were hybridised to the Illumina Infinium 27k Human Methylation Beadchip

