TITLE
Dynamic, sex-differential STAT5 and BCL6 binding to sex-biased, growth hormone-regulated genes in adult mouse liver

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Sex-dependent pituitary growth hormone (GH) secretory patterns determine the sex-biased expression of > 1,000 genes in mouse and rat liver, affecting lipid and drug metabolism, inflammation and disease. A fundamental biological question is how robust differential expression can be achieved for hundreds of sex-biased genes simply based on the GH input signal pattern: pulsatile GH stimulation in males vs. near-continuous GH exposure in females. STAT5 is an essential transcriptional mediator of the sex-dependent effects of GH in the liver, but the mechanisms that underlie its sex-dependent actions are obscure. Here we elucidate the dynamic, sex-dependent binding of STAT5 and the GH/STAT5-regulated repressor BCL6 to mouse liver chromatin, revealing the counteractive interplay between these two regulators of liver sex-specificity. Our findings establish a close correlation between sex-dependent STAT5 binding and sex-biased target gene expression. Moreover, sex-dependent STAT5 binding correlated positively with sex-biased DNase hypersensitivity and H3-K4me1 and H3-K4me3 (activating) marks, correlated negatively with sex-biased H3-K27me3 (repressive) marks, and was associated with sex-differentially enriched motifs for HNF6/CDP factors. Importantly, BCL6 binding was preferentially associated with repression of female-biased STAT5 targets in male liver. Furthermore, BCL6 and STAT5 common targets but not BCL6 unique targets showed strong enrichment for lipid and drug metabolism. These findings provide a comprehensive, genome-wide view of the mechanisms whereby these two GH-regulated transcription factors establish and maintain sex differences affecting liver physiology and disease. The approaches used here to characterize sex-dependent STAT5 and BCL6 binding can be applied to other condition-specific regulatory factors and binding sites and their interplay with co-operative chromatin-binding factors.

DESIGN
Mouse livers were excised from individual male and female mice killed at either a peak of STAT5 binding activity, or during the growth hormone (GH) interpulse interval, when STAT5 activity is either low (females) or essentially undetectable (males).  Sonicated, cross-linked liver nuclear chromatin was then used to identify STAT5 binding sites by ChIP-Seq.

PLATFORM
GPL9250 Illumina Genome Analyzer II (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
22158971

