TITLE
Angus PRKG2 R678X homozygous (dwarf) cattle vs unaffected growth plate cartilage

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
Kinase activity of cGMP-dependant, type II, protein kinase (PRKG2) is required for the proliferative to hypertrophic growth transition of growth plate chondrocytes during endochondral ossification. Loss of PRKG2 function in rodent and bovine models results in dwarfism. We compared growth plate cartilage gene expression profiles of PRKG2R678X/R678X, dwarf and PRKG2R678X/+, unaffected Angus cattle using microarray technology to discover pathways regulated by PRKG2.  Calves used in this analysis were produced by the mating between a dwarf carrier sire and two dams- a mother (carrier) and daughter (dwarf) pair.  Each dam produced three calves by embryo transfer, which were born in two calving groups.  Growth plate cartilage was harvested from the tibia of each animal at approximately 215 days of age.  Total RNA was extracted by a modified Trizol protocol.  The bovine cDNA microarray (GEO Accession: GPL8813) was used for this analysis. Samples were labeled with Cy3 or Cy5 and hybridized by dye swapping the dwarf (4 dwarf animals- 2 per dam/calving group) and unaffected individuals (2 unaffected animals- 1 per dam/ calving group) such that each dwarf was compared to the unaffected full-sib produced in the same calving group.  Each cDNA array was analyzed at three different PMT levels (PMT70,80 and 90), resulting in 12 total image files for statistical analysis.

DESIGN
Dwarf PRKG2 R678X homozygous cattle were compared to unaffected, age matched samples.  Samples were labeled with Cy3 or Cy5 and hybridized by dye swapping the dwarf (4 dwarf animals- 2 per dam/calving group) and unaffected individuals (2 unaffected animals- 1 per dam/ calving group) such that each dwarf was compared to the unaffected full-sib produced in the same calving group (i.e. unaffected samples had 2 technical replicates).  Each cDNA array was analyzed at three different PMT levels (PMT70,80 and 90), resulting in 12 total image files for statistical analysis.

