TITLE
Impact of Velvet complex on transcriptome and penicillin G production in glucose-limited chemostat cultures of a beta-lactam high-producing Penicillium chrysogenum strain

ORGANISM
Penicillium chrysogenum

SUMMARY
The multi-component global regulator Velvet complex has been identified as a key regulator of secondary metabolite production in Aspergillus and Penicillium species. Previous work indicated a massive impact of PcvelA and PclaeA deletions, two key components of the Velvet complex, on penicillin production in prolonged batch cultures of P. chrysogenum, as well as substantial changes in transcriptome. The present study investigates the impact of these mutations on product formation and genome-wide transcript profiles under glucose-limited, aerobic conditions, relevant for industrial production of β-lactams. The gene-deletion cassette for PcvelA or PclaeA was integrated in a hdfA mutant of the penicillin high-producing strain P. chrysogenum DS17690. Predicted amino acid sequences of PcVelA and PcLaeA in this strain were identical to those in its ancestor Wisconsin54-1255. Controls were performed to rule out transformation-associated loss of penicillin-biosynthesis clusters which, in preliminary studies, led to a massive reduction of penicillin production in a PcvelA deletion mutant. The correct PcvelA and PclaeA deletion strains revealed a significant (up to 30 %) reduction of penicillin-G productivity relative to the reference strain, which is a much smaller reduction than previously reported for prolonged batch cultures of P. chrysogenum strains. Chemostat-based transcriptome analysis yielded only 23 genes with a consistent response in the PcvelAΔ and PclaeAΔ mutants when grown in the absence of the penicillin-G side-chain precursor phenylacetic acid. 11 of these genes belonged to two small gene clusters (with 5 and 6 genes, respectively), one of which contains a gene with high homology to an aristolochene synthase.  These results provide a clear caveat that the impact of the Velvet complex on secondary metabolism in filamentous fungi may be strongly context dependent

DESIGN
Previous studies on the impact of the Velvet complex in P. chrysogenum were performed in prolonged batch cultures. Time course analysis revealed that the impact of PcvelA and PclaeA mutations was most pronounced after prolonged incubation {Hoff, 2010 6 /id}, but the physiological status of these cultures was not precisely defined. Industrial production of β-lactam antibiotics is performed in sugar-limited, aerobic fed-batch cultures {Menezes, 1994 76 /id}. The aim of the present study is to investigate the impact of the Velvet complex on physiology, penicilllin production and transcriptional regulation under industrially relevant conditions. To this end, we studied the impact of PcvelA and PclaeA deletions in aerobic, glucose-limited chemostat cultures of the penicillin high-producing strain P. chrysogenum DS17690.

