TITLE
Transcriptional Response to Sulfur Limitation in Pelagibacter ubique

ORGANISM
Candidatus Pelagibacter ubique HTCC1062

SUMMARY
Candidatus Pelagibacter ubique is the most abundant marine microorganism, but is unable to utilize inorganic sulfur compounds that are plentiful in the ocean. To investigate how these cells adapt to organic sulfur limitation, batch cultures were grown in defined media containing either limiting or non-limiting amounts of dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) as the sole sulfur source. Protein and mRNA expression were measured during exponential growth, immediately prior to stationary phase, and in late stationary phase. Two distinct responses were observed: one as DMSP approached exhaustion, and another after the DMSP supply was depleted. The first response was characterized by increased transcription and translation of all Ca. P. ubique genes downstream of previously confirmed S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) riboswitches: bhmT, mmuM, and metY. These genes were up to 33 times more abundant during low DMSP conditions and shunt all available sulfur to methionine. The osmotically inducible organic hydroperoxidase OsmC was the most up-regulated protein as DMSP (an osmolyte) became scarce. The second response, during sulfur-depleted stationary phase, saw increased transcription of the heme c shuttle ccmC and two small genes of unknown function (SAR11_1163 and SAR11_1164) which were 6-10 times higher in sulfur-starved cultures. No known membrane transporters were up-regulated in response to sulfur limitation, suggesting that this bacterium's strategy for coping with sulfur stress focuses on intracellularly redistributing, rather than importing, organic sulfur compounds. This supports the conclusion that the few organosulfur molecules that Ca. P. ubique is able to metabolize are rarely limiting in the marine environment.

DESIGN
Batch cultures of P. ubique were grown in a defined arificial seawater media. Five cultures were amended with a limiting concentration of DMSP as the sole sulfur source and another four control cultures were amended with a non-limiting DMSP concentration. Cultures were harvested for microarray analyses at multiple timepoints for the purpose of observing differences in gene expression related to sulfur limitation. Proteomic analyses were conducted in parallel and are available at https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD003672 .

PLATFORM
GPL7330 Candidatus Pelagibacter ubique OSU_SAR11_affychip

CITATIONS
Daniel P. Smith, Carrie D. Nicora, Paul Carini, Mary S. Lipton, Angela D. Norbeck, Richard D. Smith and Stephen J. Giovannoni. Proteome Remodeling in Response to Sulfur Limitation in " Candidatus Pelagibacter ubique " . mSystems 2016 July;1(4):e00068-16. DOI:10.1128/mSystems.00068-16

