TITLE
Genolyptus microarray studies of Eucalyptus grandis and Eucalyptus globulus leaf and xylem tissues

ORGANISM
Eucalyptus globulus ; Eucalyptus grandis

SUMMARY
In order to pinpoint the most differentially expressed genes between Eucalyptus grandis leaf blades and vascular (xylem) tissues as well as between E. grandis and Eucalyptus globulus xylem tissues, a total number of nine 50mer-oligoprobes covering the length of each one of 21,432 unique sequences derived from the Genolyptus EST dataset were synthesized “on-chip” in duplicate, randomly distributed in two blocks of each slide. Probes were also synthesized from ten cDNA sequences encoding known human proteins as negative controls, totaling 21,442 sequences. Leaves and xylem samples were taken from two E. grandis clonal trees, i.e., both derived from the same matrix tree and harboring the same genotype. Two additional xylem samples were collected from two other E. grandis clonal trees of a different genotype, as well as from two E. globulus clonal trees. Therefore, ten cDNA samples and ten identical chips were produced at Roche NimbleGen for the microarray assays, with a total number of 385,956 features per slide. Besides the discovery of differentially expressed genes between leaf and xylem, we wanted to test the validity of the assumed “technical” and “biological duplicates” since all trees were field-grown and four years-old in age.

DESIGN
A ten chip study using total RNA recovered from mature leaf and vascular (xylem) tissues of Eucalyptus grandis and xylem from Eucalyptus globulus trees. Two clonal trees of E. grandis (E.grandis_Clone A_Ramet 1 and E.grandis_Clone A_Ramet 2), derived from a single matrix tree and therefore genomically identical, were the source of two samples of leaf RNA and two samples of xylem RNA, individually hybridized to four chips after cDNA synthesis/Cy3 labeling. Two other clonal trees of E. grandis (E.grandis_Clone B_Ramet 1 and E.grandis_Clone B_Ramet 2), derived from a different matrix tree, were the source of two additional samples of xylem RNA individually hybridized to four chips after cDNA synthesis/Cy3 labeling. Likewise, two pairs of clonal trees of E. globulus (E.globulus_Clone A_Ramet 1 and E.globulus_Clone A_Ramet 2/ E.globulus_Clone B_Ramet 1 and E.globulus_Clone B_Ramet 2), derived from two distinct matrix trees, were the source of four additional samples of xylem RNA, individually hybridized to four chips after cDNA synthesis/Cy3 labeling. Each chip measures the expression level of 21,432 genes from Eucalyptus sp. and ten human genes (negative controls) with nine 50-mer probe pairs (PM/MM) per gene in two separate blocks per chip (technical duplicate), totalizing 18 hybridization signal values per gene per chip.

PLATFORM
GPL14357 NimbleGen Eucalyptus 386K array v.1.0.

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

