TITLE
An EGFR-mutation signature reveals features of the EGFR-dependent phenotype and identifies MACC1 as an EGFR-associated regulator of MET.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancers bear hallmarks including sensitivity to EGFR inhibitors,  and low proliferation, and increased MET.  However, the biology of EGFR dependence is still poorly understood. Using a training cohort of chemo-naive lung adenocarcinomas, we have developed a 72-gene signature that predicts (i) EGFR mutation status in four independent datasets; (ii) sensitivity to erlotinib in vitro; and (iii) improved survival, even in the wild-type EGFR subgroup. The signature includes differences associated with enhanced receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling, such as increased expression of endocytosis-related genes, decreased phosphatase levels, decreased expression of proliferation-related genes, increased folate receptor-1 (FOLR1) (a determinant of pemetrexed response), and higher levels of MACC1 (which we identify as a regulator of MET in EGFR-mutant NSCLC).  Those observations provide evidence that the EGFR-mutant phenotype is associated with alterations in the cellular machinery that links the EGFR and MET pathways and create a permissive environment for RTK signaling. We have developed a gene expression signature that predicts (i) EGFR mutation in chemo-naive and, to a lesser extent, in chemo-refractory NSCLC patients; (ii) EGFR TKI response in vitro; and (iii) survival in wild-type EGFR patients. The signature also identifies novel features of EGFR mutant NSCLC including increased levels of endocytosis-related genes and MACC1, which appears be an EGFR mutant associated regulator of MET.

DESIGN
Gene expression profiles were measured in 124 core biopsies from patients with refractory non-small cell lung cancer in the  Biomarker-integrated Approaches of Targeted Therapy for Lung Cancer Elimination (BATTLE) trial. We used the BATTLE dataset to test an EGFR-mutation gene expression signature trained in chemo-naive lung adenocarcinoma. The signature was computed as an index, called EGFR index.

PLATFORM
GPL6244 [HuGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

