TITLE
To examine vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) under  four conditions

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Vascular calcification is a hallmark of atherosclerosis and end-stage renal disease (ESRD).  However, the molecular mechanism of vascular calcification is poorly understood.  Diabetes mellitus is increasingly recognized as the most important cause for atherosclerosis and ESRD.  Emerging evidence supports the concept that vascular calcification resembles the process of osteogenesis, in which the vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) undergo osteochondrogenic differentiation.  Recently, we have established an in vitro calcification system with primary mouse VSMC. With the use of osteogenic stimuli, we induced trans-differentiation of primary mouse VSMC into bone-like cells.  Interestingly stroptozotocin (STZ), O-GlcNAcase inhibitor and a drug that has been used to induce diabetes in mice, was able to induce calcification of VSMC and the expression of the osteogenic transcription factor Runx2, suggesting glycosylation may be involved in regulation of Runx2. We have reported an essential role of Runx2 in oxidative stress-induce VSMC calcification and have recently generated a tissue specific mouse with Runx2 ablation in smooth muscle cells.

DESIGN
Therefore, we will use STZ and other relevant reagents in the glucose synthesis/metabolism pathways as stimuli for VSMC calcification to characterize the glycogene profiles during VSMC calcification. Results from VSMC of Runx2 knockout mice will be compared with those from control mice to determine the regulation of calcification-associated glycogenes by Runx2 in response to STZ.  These studies will provide foundation for further mechanistic studies and may lead to identification of novel strategies and targets for diabetes-induced vascular calcification. To examine vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC)  under two conditions:  1) wild-type VSMC differentiated into bone-like cells with osteogenic media,  2) wild-type VSMC treated with STZ and osteogenic media

PLATFORM
GPL11098 [Glyco_v4_Mm] Affymetrix Glyco v4 GeneChip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

