TITLE
Transcriptome profiling identified genes and pathways associated with arsenic toxicity and tolerance in Arabidopsis

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Transcriptional profiling of arsenic-induced toxicity and tolerance in Arabidopsis plants of different ecotypes Arsenic (As) is a toxic metalloid found ubiquitously in the environment and has widely been known as an acute poison and carcinogen.  As toxicity is a major factor leading to root growth inhibition in plants.  However, the molecular mechanisms of plants in response to As has not been extensively characterized.  In this study, Arabidopsis ecotypes that are As-tolerant (Col-0) and -sensitive (Ws-2) were used to conduct a transcriptome analysis of the response to As (V).  To begin elucidating the molecular basis of As toxicity and tolerance in Arabidopsis, seedlings of Col-0 and Ws-2 were subjected to As treatment.   The root elongation rate of Col-0 was significantly higher than that of Ws-2 when exposed to As.  The tolerant ecotype (Col-0) demonstrated lower accumulation of As when compared to the responses observed in the sensitive Ws-2.  Subsequently, the effect of As exposure on genome-wide gene expression was examined in the two ecotypes.  Comparative analysis of microarray data identified groups of genes with common and specific responses to As between Col-0 and Ws-2.  The genes related to heat responses and oxidative stresses belonged to common responses, indicating conserved stress-associated changes across two ecotypes.  The majority of specific responsive genes were those encoding heat shock proteins, heat shock factors, ubiquitin and transporters.  The data suggested that metal transport and maintenance of protein structure may be important mechanisms for toxicity and tolerance to As.  This study presents comprehensive surveys of global transcriptional regulation and identifies stress- and tolerance-associated genes in response to As.

DESIGN
Comparison of Arabidopsis ecotype Col-0 and Ws-2 in response to As (V) for 1.5 and 3 hr Affymetrix GeneChip assay were performed by the Affymetrix Gene Expression Service Lab ( http://ipmb.sinica.edu.tw/affy/ ), supported by Academia Sinica, Taiwan

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
24734953

