TITLE
Effect of a High Phosphorus Diet on Renal Gene Expressions in Rat

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
The mechanism by which phosphorus levels are maintained in the body was investigated by analyzing changes in gene expression in the rat kidney following administration of a high-phosphorus diet. Male Wistar rats were fed a high phosphorous (HP) diet containing 1.2% phosphorous, or 0.3% HP as a control, for 24 days.  Phosphorous retention was not significantly increased in HP rats, but fractional excretion of phosphorus was significantly increased in the HP group compared to controls, with an excessive amount of the ingested phosphorus being passed through the body. DNA microarray analysis of kidney tissue from both groups revealed changes in gene expression profile induced by a HP diet. Among the genes that were upregulated, gene ontology (GO) terms related to ossification, collagen fibril organization, and inflammation and immune response were significantly enriched. In particular, there was significant upregulation of type IIb sodium-dependent phosphate transporter (NaPi-IIb) in the HP rat kidney compared to control rats. This upregulation was confirmed by in situ hybridization. Discreet signals for NaPi-IIb in both the cortex and medulla of the kidney were apparent in the HP group, while the corresponding signals were much weaker in the control group. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that NaPi-IIb localized to the basolateral side of kidney epithelial cells surrounding the urinary duct in HP rats but not in control animals. These data suggest that NaPi-IIb is upregulated in the kidney in response to the active excretion of phosphate in HP diet-fed rats.

DESIGN
Male Wistar rats (4 weeks old) were purchased from Japan SLC Co. (Hamamatsu, Japan) and individually housed in metabolic cages under controlled conditions of 22±1°C and a 12-hour light/dark cycle (lights on from 08:00 to 20:00 daily). Two different diets containing 0.3% phosphorous (control diet) and 1.2% phosphorous (HP diet) were prepared based on the AIN-93G diet (Table 1). All rats were fed the control diet for a 7-day acclimatization period. After acclimatization, rats were divided into two groups of similar mean body weight (n = 5 each) and then fed either the control or the HP diet for 24 days. The animals were allowed to eat ad libitum and had free access to water (MilliQ water).The protocol for the animal experiments was approved by the Animal Use Committee of the Faculty of Agriculture at The University of Tokyo.

