TITLE
Differential Gene and Transcript Expression Analysis with TopHat and Cufflinks

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
This submission includes the sample data for a protocol covering differential expression analysis with TopHat and Cufflinks.  The protocol also covers several accessory tools and utilities that aid in managing data, including CummeRbund, a tool for visualizing RNA-Seq analysis results. While the procedure assumes basic informatics skills, these tools assume little to no background with RNA-Seq analysis and are meant for novices and experts alike. The protocol begins with raw sequencing reads and produces a transcriptome assembly, lists of differentially expressed and regulated genes and transcripts, and publication-quality visualizations of analysis results.

DESIGN
The example data was generated in silico to closely resemble a real experiment in Drosophila melanogaster. First, expression values in cultured S2 cells were calculated for FlyBase 5.2 transcripts. These values were used to generate 3 sequencing replicates for condition " C1 " , with underlying variability in expression across replicates simulated by fitting a negative binomial model through the real S2 read count data. A second simulated condition " C2 " was generated by perturbing expression for 300 randomly selected genes.  Genes were perturbed by selecting the most highly expressed isoform and increasing its relative expression by three fold.  Three replicates of this condtion were sequenced as above.  Simulated sequencing was performed by picking a transcript from the FlyBase transcriptome with equal to its abundance, choosing a fragment length from a normal distribution with mean = 180bp and standard deviation = 20bp, and then choosing a start point for the fragment within the transcript uniformly at random.  Total sequencing yield for each replicate was chosen to match that of the real S2 data. Each replicate was mapped to the fly genome with TopHat v 1.3.1 seperately.  The replicates were assembled seperately with Cufflinks v 1.1.0. The replicate assemblies were merged with Cuffmerge.  This merged assembly was then analysed for differentially expressed and regulated genes with Cuffdiff.

PLATFORM
GPL11203 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Drosophila melanogaster)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
