TITLE
Genetic diversity study for Entamoeba strains

ORGANISM
Entamoeba histolytica

SUMMARY
Little is known about the extent of genetic variability among Entamoeba strains and potential genotypic associations with virulence.  Variable phenotypes have been identified for Entamoeba strains.  E. histolytica is invasive and causes colitis and liver abscesses, but only in 10% of infected individuals; 90% of subjects remain asymptomatically colonized.  E. dispar, a closely related species, appears to be incapable of causing invasive disease.  In order to determine the extent of genetic diversity among Entamoeba strains we have developed an E. histolytica genomic DNA microarray and used it to genotype strains of E. dispar and E. histolytica.  Based on the identification of divergent genetic loci, all six strains (four EH and two ED) had unique genetic fingerprints.  Genomic regions with unusually high levels of divergence were identified indicating that structural or evolutionary pressures are molding selective regions of the Entamoeba genome.  Comparison of divergent genetic regions allowed us to readily distinguish between EH and ED, identify novel genetic regions that may be used for strain and species typing, and identity a number of novel potential virulence determinants.  Among these are Androgen Inducible Gene1, a CXXC receptor kinase, a peroxiredoxin 1-related gene, a Ras family member gene, a Rab geranylgeranyltransferase, and a gene with a UPF0034 domain.  Among the four EH strains, an avirulent strain EH (Rahman) was the most divergent and phylogenetically distinct raising the intriguing possibility that genetic subtypes of E. histolytica may be at least partially responsible for the observed variability in clinical outcomes.  Our approach shows the utility of a microarray-based genotyping assay to identify genetic variability between Entamoeba isolates and can readily be applied to the study of clinical isolates. A genotyping experiment design type classifies an individual or group of individuals on the basis of alleles, haplotypes, SNP's. Keywords: genotyping_design

