TITLE
Comparative genomics of Helicobacter pylori strains associated with different clinical outcome

ORGANISM
Helicobacter pylori

SUMMARY
In this study, a whole-genome CombiMatrix Custom oligonucleotide tiling microarray with 90000 probes covering six sequenced Helicobacter pylori(H. pylori) genomes was designed and utilized for comparative genomic profiling of eight unsequenced strains isolated from patients with different gastroduodenal diseases in Heilongjiang province of China. Since significant genomic variation were found among these strains, an additional 76 H. pylori stains with different clinical outcomes isolated from various provinces of China were further tested by PCR to demonstrate this distinction. We observed several highly variable regions among strains of gastritis, gastric ulceration and gastric cancer. They are involved in genes associated with bacterial type I, type II and type III R-M system as well as in a virB gene neighboring the well studied cag pathogenic island. Previous studies have reported the diverse genetic characterization of this pathogenic island, but it is conserved in the strains tested by microarray in this study. Moreover, a number of genes involved in the type IV secretion system related to DNA horizontal transfer between H. pylori strains were identified based on the comparative analysis of the strain specific genes. These findings may provide new insights for discovering biomarkers for prediction of gastric diseases.

DESIGN
Here we describe the design and use of a high-density oligonucleotide microarray covering six sequenced H. pylori genomes as well as several sequenced plasmids. The performance of this microarray is evaluated, and its utility is illustrated for the hybridization of genomic DNA in order to compare eight uncharacterized H. pylori strains which have not been sequenced with the six known, sequenced strains. We utilize this microarray to identify variable genomic region among H. pylori strains isolated from patients with different gastroduodenal diseases in a Chinese patient population. H. pylori isolates from 2 patients with chronic superficial gastritis, 2 patients with atrophic gastritis, 2 patients with gastric ulcer, and 2 patients with gastric cancer were studied. All eight strains were isolated from Heilongjiang province of China. A number of variable regions with high genetic diversity was identified. 26 selected genes were validated by large scale PCR in both microarray tested strains while an additional 76 strains were isolated from eight provinces.

PLATFORM
GPL14380 Combimatrix Helicobacter pylori Custom 90k Whole Genome Tiling Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

