TITLE
Plac8-dependent and iNOS-dependent T cell-mediate mechanisms clear Chlamydia muridarum infections from the genital tract

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Comparison of two Chlamydia-specific CD4 T cells that are dependent on iNOS to terminate Chlamydia replication in epithelial cells to two Chlamydia-specific CD4 T cells that are iNOS-independent:  Chlamydia trachomatis urogenital serovars replicate predominately in epithelial cells lining the reproductive tract.  This tissue tropism poses a unique challenge for the host immune system and vaccine development.  Studies utilizing the Chlamydia muridarum mouse model have shown that CD4 T cells are critical and sufficient to clear primary genital tract infections.  In vitro studies have shown that CD4 T cells terminate the infection in epithelial cells by up regulating epithelial iNOS transcription and nitric oxide production via IFN-gamma and T cell-epithelial cell interactions mediated by LFA-1-ICAM-1.  This mechanism however is not critical as iNOS-deficient mice clear infections normally, and IFN-gamma deficient mice clear 99.9% of the infection with near normal kinetics.  We recently showed that a subset of Chlamydia-specific CD4 T cell clones were able to terminate replication in epithelial cells using a mechanism that was independent of iNOS and IFN-gamma.  That mechanism did not require physical lysis of infected cells, but instead required T cell degranulation.  In this study we advanced that work using gene expression microarrays to compare CD4 T cell clones that are able to terminate epithelial replication via an iNOS-independent mechanism to iNOS-dependent CD4 T cell clones.  Micro array experiments showed that Plac8 was differentially expressed by the T cell clones having the iNOS-independent mechanism.  Plac8-deficient mice had significantly delayed clearance of C. muridarum genital tract infections, and that the large majority of Plac8-deficient mice treated with the iNOS-inhibitor N-monomethyl-L-arginine (MLA) were unable to resolve a C. muridarum genital tract infection over 8 weeks.  These results demonstrate that there are two independent and redundant T cell mechanisms for clearing C. muridarum genital tract infections; one mechanism dependent on iNOS, the other mechanism dependent on Plac8.  While T cells subsets have been defined by cytokine profiles, there are important subdivisions by effector functions, in this case CD4Plac8.

DESIGN
Gene expression study using 4 experimental groups with 4 replicates each.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
22238459

