TITLE
Lr1-mediated leaf rust resistance pathways of transgenic wheat lines

ORGANISM
Triticum aestivum

SUMMARY
The wheat gene Lr1 imparts resistance to certain races of the leaf rust pathogen Puccinia triticina. However, the biological basis underlying the complex resistance mechanisms remains largely unknown. Gene expression profiling analyses using the Affymetrix GeneChip® Wheat Genome Array were performed with six independent Lr1 transgenic lines sampled before inoculation (0h) and at 6 and 24 h after inoculation with the avirulent P. triticina race CCDS. For the 6 and 24 h time points, 3 384 probe sets corresponding to 2 978 transcripts were differentially expressed as compared to the plants before inoculation. Genes involved in defence signalling were triggered as early as 6 h post inoculation (HPI) and included COI1, the primary component of jasmonic acid signalling. By 24 HPI, a shift in plant cellular metabolism, namely carbon conservation, was notable. The enzymes of glycolysis and gluconeogenesis were down-regulated, however, enzymes linked to alternative carbon sequestration processes such as the glyoxylate cycle were up-regulated. Also at 24 HPI, various secondary signalling molecules belonging to the various hormone signalling pathways were triggered. These microarray data suggest that the Lr1 mediated leaf rust resistance is achieved by early onset of defence signalling followed by co-ordinated interplay of metabolism alteration and elicitation of defence responses. We used microarrays to detail the early gene expression events underlying Lr1-mediated resistance to Puccinia triticina pathogen in wheat.

DESIGN
Three biological replicates with six independent Lr1 transgenic lines were used in this study to eliminate the possibility of false discovery of genes due to copy number variation or the position of insertion of the transgene  Lr1. Early time points of 6 and 24 HPI were compared to 0 h (prior to inoculation) to capture the early signalling events involved in Lr1-mediated response to rust infection.

