TITLE
Bisulfite Sequencing Reveals that Aspergillus flavus Holds A Hollow in DNA Methylation

ORGANISM
Aspergillus flavus

SUMMARY
Aspergillus flavus first gained scientific attention for its production of aflatoxin, the most potent naturally occurring toxin and hepatocarcinogenic secondary metabolite. For several decades, The DNA methylation status of A. flavus remains to be controversial. We first applied bisulfite sequencing, the gold standard at present, in conjunction with a biological replicate strategy to investigate the DNA methylation profiling of A. flavus genome. Our results reveal that the DNA methylation level of this fungus turns out to be negligible, comparable to the unmethylated lambda DNA we set as the false positive control of our bisulfite experiments. When comparing the DNA methyltransferase homolog of A. flauvs with that from several selected hypermethylated speices, we find that the DNA methyltransferase homolog of A.flavus as well as the other Aspergillus members groups closely with the RID from Neurospora crassa and Masc1 from Ascobolus immerses, which has been reported as DMT-incapable, but it diverges distantly from the other capable DNA methyltransferases. We observe significant depletion of repeat components within the A. flavus, which may possibly explain the lack of DNA methylation in this fungus. What's more, the RIP-index of the repeat of A. flavus turns out to be higher than the fungi without RID-like enzyme, suggesting this asexual fungus may possibly possess RIP process during the obscure sexual-stage which is very evanescent and may potentially related to DNA methylation.   This work contributes to our understanding on the DNA methylation status of A. flavus. Also, it reinforces our views on the DNA methylation in fungal species. What's more, our strategy of applying bisulfite sequencing to DNA methylation detection on species with low DNA methylation may serve as a reference for later scientific investigations on other hypomethylated species.

DESIGN
Two replicates were subjected to bisulfite conversion independently, unmethylated lambda DNA as a false positive control is added to both replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL13733 Illumina Genome Analyzer II (Aspergillus flavus)

CITATIONS
22276181

