TITLE
Gene expression profiling in skeletal muscle after the intramuscular administration of a pharmaceutical vehicle

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
The objective of this work was to identify genes with a variable expression profile during the course of a skeletal muscle degeneration and regeneration damage in pig. Using cDNA microarrays and repeated measurements performed in the same ten piglets, the expression profile of 1651 genes was investigated at 0, 6 and 48 hours, then 7 and 21 days after the induction of a local iatrogenic muscle damage. The main variations in gene expression were seen within the first 2 days after the induction of the muscle damage. However, among the 81 theoretically possible patterns of gene expression profiles, only 14 were found to occur. Finally, from the whole data analysis, eight genes with the best discriminant power have been highlighted from 2 patterns of gene expression profiles: two of those genes were up regulated at 6 hours whereas the remaining 6 genes were up regulated toward the end of the muscle damage kinetic. Keywords: other

DESIGN
Ten piglets were included in this study. Each animal received a series of 4 intramuscular administrations of propylene glycol randomly distributed into the Longissimus dorsi muscles at different time-intervals in order to finally obtain muscle lesions at 6 h, 2, 7 and 21 days after the IM administration. An additional non-injected site was used as control muscle tissue. Total RNA was isolated from each of the 50 muscle samples using a commercial kit, and controlled for quality and concentration using an AGILENT 2100 bioanalyzer. cDNA was synthesized and labelled from 5 µg total RNA by simultaneous reverse transcription of mRNA using SuperScriptTM II RNase H- Reverse Transcriptase and 33P-deoxy-CTP. Each muscle sample mRNA was hybridized at 68°C during 24 h to one array containing two duplicated parts. The arrays were then exposed to radioisotopic-sensitive imaging plates that were scanned thereafter with a phosphor imaging system at a 25 µm resolution. Hybridization images were quantified using a semi-automated software through a grid process with a fixed spot diameter. The output was then subjected to the data analysis process.

PLATFORM
GPL2731 Spotting_muscle_21OCT03

CITATIONS
17380264

