TITLE
Comparison of gene expression in Wild type and T cell-specific conditional Trim28 KO in TCR stimulated and un-stimulated naive CD4 positive and T regulatory cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
A microarray study was performed in unstimulated and TCR-stimulated CD4 + T cells and Treg in wild type and conditional Trim28 KO mice to identify genes that are regulated by Trim28.  These experiments constitute a portion of the study described below:     Paper Abstract: Peripheral T cell activation and differentiation into specialized effectors are regulated by TCR- and cytokine-mediated signals that induce clonal expansion and unique transcriptional factors. These processes may include active chromatin modification by nuclear factors. In search of such molecules, we found Trim28, a component of large nuclear chromatin-regulatory complex is tightly controlled upon TCR stimulation at the level of phosphorylation, and examined global impact of Trim28 loss in especially CD4+ T cells, by generating T cell-specific conditional Trim28 KO mice (CKO). CD4+ T cells from CKO mice showed defective IL-2 production and T cell proliferation associated with defective upregulation of cell-cycle associated proteins. Accordingly, young CKO showed T-lymphopenia. Surprisingly, Trim28 CKO mice eventually accumulated auto-reactive memory-phenotype T cells that produced inflammatory IL-17. CKO mice are also susceptible to induced auto-inflammatory disease with TH-17 dominant immune response.  Loss of Trim28 showed aberrant accumulation of TH-17 and FoxP3+ T cells, two key T cells in inflammation vs. tolerance. We found CKO T cells showed a cell-extrinsic promotion of TH-17 and FoxP3+ T cell development by a mechanism involving overproduction of TGF-beta. Our study revealed unexpected roles of Trim28, a global chromatin regulator in both T cell activation and tolerance.

DESIGN
Trim28 conditional KO mice and age-matched control mice were sacrificed, and neive CD4+ T cells (CD4+CD62+CD25-) and Treg (CD4+CD62+CD25+) were sorted. Stimulation of naive T cells was done with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 for 13 hours.  We collected quadruplicates for each group.

PLATFORM
GPL7202 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
22544392

