TITLE
The role of miR-199 in HIF1a-mediated hypoxia response in epithelial ovarian cancer cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The high rates of mortality associated with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) are a direct consequence of its metastatic nature. Metastasis is dependent on many factors, among which activation of angiogenesis is most significant. Angiogenesis is, in turn, contingent upon the cellular response to hypoxia within the tumor microenvironment. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF1) is a transcription factor composed of HIF1alpha and HIF1beta subunits and is the master regulator of the hypoxic response. It is therefore a critical mediator of tumor angiogenesis and metastasis. Regulation of HIF1 is primarily at the level of protein. In normoxia, the HIF1alpha subunit is hydroxylated via an oxygen- and iron-dependent mechanism and targeted for destruction. In hypoxia, low oxygen levels preclude hydroxylation and HIF1alpha is stabilized, allowing for its association with constitutively expressed HIF1beta to form bioactive HIF1. We have identified a novel mechanism of HIF1alpha regulation in EOC cells that involves microRNAs (miRs), ~22 nucleotide, non-coding RNA molecules that repress translation of target mRNAs by binding their 3’ untranslated regions (UTRs).  Using microarray and qPCR analysis, we found that levels of miR-199a-1, a miR that is predicted in silico to target the HIF1alpha 3’ UTR, were reduced under hypoxia in EOC cells. We further demonstrated that miR-199a-1 directly targets the HIF1alpha 3’ UTR and overexpression of miR-199a-1 suppresses HIF1alpha protein levels and HIF1-driven gene expression. Moreover, cells stably overexpressing miR-199a-1 exhibit marked defects in migratory ability. These data were corroborated by our in vivo findings, which demonstrated that overexpression of miR-199a-1 causes significant reductions in tumor vessel density and tumor burden in nude mice. These findings provide insight into non-canonical, miR- and iron-based mechanisms of HIF1 regulation that may have important implications in the progression of EOC.

DESIGN
miRNA expression analysis of A2780 epithelial ovarian cancer cells by microarrays

PLATFORM
GPL14608 Multispecies Custom miRNA microarray

CITATIONS
24706848

