TITLE
A Distinct Reactive Oxygen Species Profile confers Chemoresistance in Glioma-Propagating Cells and Associates with Patient Survival Outcome

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Aims: We explore the role of elevated O2-:H2O2 ratio as a prosurvival signal in glioma-propagating cells (GPCs). We hypothesize that depleting this ratio sensitizes GPCs to apoptotic triggers. Results: We observed that elevated O2-:H2O2 ratio conferred enhanced resistance in GPCs, and depletion of this ratio by pharmacological and genetic methods sensitized cells to apopotic triggers. We established the ROS Index as a quantitative measure of normalized O2-:H2O2 ratio and determined its utility in predicting chemosensitivity. Importantly, mice implanted with GPCs of reduced ROS Index demonstrated extended survival. Analysis of tumor sections revealed effective targeting of CD133- and nestin-expressing neural precursors. Furthermore, we established the Connectivity Map to interrogate a gene signature derived from varied ROS Index for patterns of association with individual patient gene expression in 2 clinical databases. We showed that patients with reduced ROS Index demonstrate better survival. These data provide clinical evidence for the viability of our O2-:H2O2-mediated chemosensitivity profiles. Innovation and Conclusion: Gliomas are notoriously recurrent and highly infiltrative, and have been shown to arise from stem-like cells. We implicate elevated O2-:H2O2 ratio as a prosurvival signal in GPC self-renewal and proliferation. The ROS Index provides quantification of O2-:H2O2-mediated chemosensitivity, an advancement in a previously qualitative field. Intriguingly, glioma patients with reduced ROS Index correlate with longer survival and the Proneural molecular classification, a feature frequently associated with tumors of better prognosis. These data emphasize the feasibility of manipulating the O2-:H2O2 ratio as a therapeutic strategy.

DESIGN
Total RNA from primary neurosphere culture of brain tumor specimens treated with DPI and DDC as well as non-treated CD133+ and CD133- fractions were compared.  Specimens were obtained from 3 patients and replicate arrays were performed for all 3 neurosphere cultures.

PLATFORM
GPL6104 Illumina humanRef-8 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
23477542

