TITLE
Early downstream targets of Notch signaling which contribute to multiciliate cell fate

ORGANISM
Xenopus laevis

SUMMARY
Analysis of epithelial explants injected with the intracellular domain of Notch (ICD) to block the formation of multi-ciliate and proton secreting cells or with dominant negative human Mastermind (HMM) or a DNA binding mutant of Mastermind (DBM) to induce the formation of ectopic multi-ciliate and proton secreting cells.  Results show which genes are up or down-regulated when DBM/HMM are compared to ICD. Epithelial cells projecting hundreds of motile cilia are prominent in the respiratory system, brain ependyma and female reproductive tract where they generate a vigorous fluid flow along luminal surfaces.  Despite their importance for organ function, how multiciliate cells arise developmentally in diverse epithelia is poorly understood.  Notch signaling has been shown in a variety of tissues, including the Xenopus epithelium, to regulate the formation of multiciliate cell precursors.  In order to identify early downstream targets of Notch signaling which contribute to multiciliate cell fate we blocked or activated Notch signaling in explants of Xenopus epithelium and looked at changes in gene expression to identify candidates that regulate multiciliate cell fate. Here we identify a novel coiled-coil protein, called multicilin (MCI), whose expression is Notch-regulated and restricted to epithelia where multiciliate cells forms in Xenopus embryos.  Inhibiting MCI activity blocks the formation of multiciliate cell precursors while ectopic MCI activity is sufficient to induce multiciliate cell differentiation within epithelial progenitors.

DESIGN
2-cell stage Xenopus embryos were injected with synthetic mRNA encoding ICD, DBM or HMM.  At stage 9/10 the presumptive ectoderm was cut off the embryo and cultured on a fibronectin coated coverslip.  At stage 12 RNA was harvested from explants and used as the starting material for arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL10756 [X_laevis_2] Affymetrix Xenopus laevis Genome 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
22231168

