TITLE
Transcriptional study of oxLDL-induced foam cell formation in WT and Atf3-/- murine bone marrow macrophages

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease characterized by the accumulation of lipid-loaded macrophages in the arterial wall. Intimal macrophages internalize modified lipoproteins such as oxidized LDL (oxLDL) through scavenger receptors, leading to storage of excess cholesteryl esters in lipid bodies and a " foam cell " phenotype. In addition, stimulation of macrophage Toll-like receptors (TLRs) has been shown to promote lipid body proliferation.  We investigated the possibility that there are transcriptional regulators that are common to both pathways for stimulating foam cell formation (modified lipoproteins and TLR stimulation), and identified the transcription factor ATF3 as a candidate regulator. In this specific microarray experiment, we studied the effect of genetic knockout of ATF3 on the transcriptional response of macrophages to oxLDL. Murine bone marrow-derived macrophages from two different mouse strains (Atf3-/- and WT) were incubated in the presence or absence of oxidized low-density lipoprotein (oxLDL), and then transcriptionally profiled using the Affymetrix Mouse Exon Array 1.0 ST. The goal was to study the pattern of differential expression between WT and Atf3-/- strains, in oxLDL-induced foam cells and in non-foamy control cells, to identify cellular pathways that may be dysregulated under loss of the transcription factor ATF3 in macrophage foam cells.

DESIGN
Twelve female mice (six Atf3-/-, and six WT control mice) were sacrificed at 8-12 weeks of age, and macrophages were derived from the femoral bone marrow using rhM-CSF. oxLDL was introduced into the medium for six samples (3 WT and 3 Atf3-/-) at 25 ug/mL on day seven, and after 24 h of incubation, RNA was isolated using Trizol. Labeled cRNA derived from the RNA samples was hybridized to Affymetrix Mouse Exon Array 1.0 ST GeneChips. Microarray data were processed using transcript-level probesets, and are in log2 scale.

PLATFORM
GPL14615 [MoEx-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Exon 1.0 ST Array [custom CDF: MoEx10stv1_Mm_ENST]

CITATIONS
22473958

