TITLE
Transcriptome analysis of oocyst, tachyzoite, and bradyzoite development in the type II Toxoplasma gondii strain M4.

ORGANISM
Toxoplasma gondii

SUMMARY
There were three primary objectives to the overall experiment. I.  Describe the transcriptome of the oocyst through its development beginning with the freshly excreted, unsporulated oocyst at “Day 0” to a fully sporulated and mature oocyst at “Day 10” and including a mid-sporulation timepoint at “Day 4”. II. Compare the transcriptomes of in vitro vs. in vivo derived bradyzoites. III. Compare expression data from three life stages (oocyst, bradyzoite and tachyzoite) from the same parasite isolate, M4, which has been been characterized as a Type II strain.

DESIGN
Each array represents seperately isolated and processed RNA samples. (Two samples per time point/developmental stage) RNA samples were obtained from: 1.      Oocysts harvested from kitten feces and purified for RNA extraction at Day 0, (not sporulated), Day 4 post-induction of sporulation (mid-sporulation) and Day 10 post-induction of sporulation (fully sporulated).  Oocysts were collected and combined from two kittens that were infected with the same starting material (mouse brains containing bradyzoite cysts of the same parasite strain).  Duplicate samples were obtained from feces collected and purified on separate days. 2.      Bradyzoite cysts harvested from the brains of mice that were infected with oocysts from the same strain (obtained from the oocysts harvested from kittens as described for the oocyst RNA). Mice were treated with 0.44 µg/ml sulfadiazine in their water days 11-21 pi. Mice were sacrificed on day 21 for cyst purification. 3.      In vitro 4 and 8 dpi bradyzoite and 2 dpi tachyzoite samples are from separately infected cultures of human foreskin fibroblasts (HFFs) (replicates were infected on the same day). The parasites used for the initial infections were derived from the same culture. Samples were harvested independently and kept separate for all the subsequent processing and labeling steps.

