TITLE
Toxic effects of dietary methylmercury (MeHg) on young adult zebrafish

ORGANISM
Danio rerio

SUMMARY
Three-month old zebrafish were fed Biodiet starter (4% body weight per day) with MeHg added at 0, 0.5, 5 and 50 ppm for six weeks. Atomic absorption spectrometry was applied to measure the level of MeHg in the whole fish body. Zebrafish at six weeks were sampled from each group for gene expression analysis by NimbleGen Gene Expression 12X135K zebrafish microarrays. MeHg-exposed trout and zebrafish did not show overt signs of toxicity, nor were significant differences seen in mortality, length, mass, or condition factor. The chronic accumulation of total Hg in zebrafish exhibited dose- and time-dependent patterns. The dysregulated genes in MeHg-treated fish have multiple functional annotations, such as involving metabolism, cellular development, ion binding, stress response, transcriptional regulation, and apoptotic pathways. These results show that numerous molecular pathways involved in the growth and development of multiple organ systems are disrupted by exposure to moderate levels of dietary MeHg.  The dysregulated genes will be selected by further analysis and used as biomarkers for MeHg exposure in aquatic environments. This study will allow us to assess the potential impacts of low-level exposure to environmental MeHg in the food chain and on the health of humans and animals.

DESIGN
Three-month old zebrafish (Danio rerio, average body 0.149 g) were fed Biodiet Starter (Bio-Oregon) 4% of body weight per day with MeHg added at 0ppm, 0.5ppm, 5ppm and 50ppm (with ethanol as vehicle). Fish at six weeks were sampled from each group for gene expression analysis. Three fish from each treatment group were used for microarray experiments. Total RNA from individual fish was isolated using Trizol reagent  (Invitrogen) and further purified using the RNeasy MiniElute cleanup kit (Qiagen). Double-strand cDNA was synthesized from 10ug total RNA of individual fish by using Superscript Double-Stranded cDNA synthesis Kit (Invitrogen). ). One ug double strand DNA was labeled with Cy3 using One-Color DNA labeling Kit (NimbleGen), then hybridized to NimbleGen 12X135K array. The arrays were scanned at 2um on a NimbleGen MS200 scanner with auto-gain adjust.  The TIFF images were gridded and extracted using NimbleScan v. 2.6. Expression data were normalized using the Robust Multichip Average (RMA) algorithm.

PLATFORM
GPL14375 NimbleGen Danio rerio [100718_Zv7_EXPR]

CITATIONS
23529582

