TITLE
Development of oligonucleotide microarray to study global gene expression profile in guinea pigs in response to tuberculosis infection

ORGANISM
Cavia porcellus

SUMMARY
In this study we developed a guinea pig oligonucleotide microarray (GPOM) comprising of a total number of 45,220 features including 43,803 valid features from different mammalian species. These features are inclusive of 2971 newly annotated probes corresponding to 344 unique genes of guinea pig. As a case study, we utilized this array to examine the gene expression profile in guinea pig lungs in response to infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Studying the global gene expression profile in guinea pigs allowed identification of the disease signature of pulmonary TB infection represented by several unique genes that are differentially regulated in this model. While, 1344 unique genes exhibited marked up regulation, 1856 genes were significantly down regulated. The newly developed tool not only finds its utility in studying the global gene expression profile associated with vaccination and/or M. tuberculosis infection in this highly useful animal model but would also be immensely useful in identification of new drug targets, testing of therapies, molecular genetic analysis for diseases other than tuberculosis as well.

DESIGN
Genotypic Technology designed Custom Cavia porcellus 4x44k Gene Expression Array (Agilent-AMADID-019424) * In order to validate the GPOM developed in this study, we compared the gene expression profile of guinea pig lungs at 10 weeks post- M. tuberculosis infection with respect to that obtained from normal uninfected animals. To address this, guinea pigs were aerosol infected with M. tuberculosis, lungs were harvested at 10 weeks post-infection and RNA obtained from infected lungs was employed for cDNA synthesis and microarray hybridization. The gene expression was compared with the RNA sample obtained from the lungs of normal uninfected guinea pigs.

PLATFORM
GPL14630 Genotypic Technology designed Custom Cavia porcellus 4x44k Gene Expression Array (Agilent-AMADID-19424)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

