TITLE
Functional characterization of genes/proteins differentially expressed in phototrophic and heterotrophic tissues in Arabidopsis thaliana mutants lacking chloroplastic and cytosolic fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase genes

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Photosynthesis is arguably the most important biological process on earth. In plants, energy harvested in photosynthesis is converted into sugar and starch, which are important products from species with agronomic interest. During the photosynthesis in the chloroplast, the intermediate carbon metabolites (triose phosphates) produced by the Calvin cycle can either be exported to the cytosol for sucrose synthesis or stay in the chloroplast for starch synthesis (formation). Two fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBPase) enzymes, the chloroplastidial (cpFBPaseI) and the cytosolic (cyFBPase) isoforms, catalyse the first irreversible step during the conversion of triose phosphate to starch or sucrose, respectively. Recently, another cpFBPase isoform (cpFBPaseII) with unknown function  was identified. It has been reported that the reduction of cyFBPase or cpFBPaseI activity leads to an alteration in starch and sucrose content. In our laboratory, Arabidopsis thaliana knock-out mutants for the cyFBPase and cpFBPaseI are now available. The objective this research project is to identify and functionally characterize genes differentially expressed in Arabidopsis thaliana knock-out mutants lacking FBPase genes. We make use of high throughput methodologies, such as the transcriptomic and proteomic analyses which represent invaluable tools to identify new loci responsible for agronomically important traits.

DESIGN
Three independent biological replicates were used for each type of sample. Three hybridizations were performed, representing the three independent biological replicates, being one of them a dye swap

PLATFORM
GPL5827 Galbraith Laboratory Operon Long Oligonucleotide Microarray version 3.0 (ATq306.03.Z)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

