TITLE
Murine serum reactivity to common autoantigens in response to immunization with neutrophil extracellular traps

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Introduction:  Autoreactivity to histones is a pervasive feature of several human autoimmune disorders including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Specific post-translational modifications (PTMs) of histones within neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) may potentially drive the process by which tolerance to these chromatin-associated proteins is broken.  We hypothesized that NETs and their unique histone PTMs might be capable of inducing autoantibodies that target histones. Methods:  We developed a novel and efficient method for the in vitro production, visualization, and broad profiling of histone-PTMs of human and murine NETs.  We also immunized Balb/c mice with murine NETs and profiled their sera on autoantigen and histone peptide microarrays for evidence of autoantibody production to their immunogen. Results:  We confirmed specificity toward acetyl-modified histone H2B as well as to other histone PTMs in sera from patients with SLE known to have autoreactivity against histones.  We observed enrichment for distinctive histone marks of transcriptionally silent DNA during NETosis triggered by diverse stimuli.  However, NETs derived from human and murine sources did not harbor many of the PTMs toward which autoreactivity was observed in patients with SLE or in MRL/lpr mice. Further, while murine NETs were weak autoantigens in vivo, there was only partial overlap in the IgG and IgM autoantibody profiles induced by vaccination of mice with NETs and those seen in patients with SLE. Conclusions:  Isolated in vivo exposure to NETs is insufficient to break tolerance and may involve additional factors that have yet to be identified.

DESIGN
Serum samples from 20 systemic lupus erythematosis patients were run on the Human Epigenome Microarray Platform V1.0 (HEMP; a single-color platform), in order to profile their autoantibodies against a library of post-translationally modified histone peptides.  These 20 samples were randomly selected from a larger cohort previously profiled (data not shown) on the Utz Lab Whole Protein Autoantigen Array V2.0 (a single-color platform), where 14 were histone-reactive and 6 were histone-nonreactive.  Control sera from 9 healthy adults and a positive control comprising a mixture of autoimmune sera with defined reactivities, were also run on HEMP V1.0.  Together, these samples comprise the data appearing in Figures 1 and S1 (IgG and IgM isotype reactivity profiles, respectively), identifying IgG reactivity to 9 peptides that significantly distinguish histone-reactive from -nonreactive sera among 96 peptides profiled.    For data appearing in Figure 5, serum samples from a total of 6 Balb/c mice, consisting of two treatment groups, NETs (Neutrophil Extracellular Traps) and NETs + CRAMP (cathelicidin-related antimicrobial peptide) were collected monthly over a 3-month period, along with a zero time point.  These samples were compared with a positive control consisting of serum collected from a MLR/lpr mice exhibiting lupus-like symptoms, and a negative control with no serum.  The 0, 1 and 2 month time points were profiled on the Utz Lab Whole Protein Autoantigen Array V2.0 and are shown in Figure 5A-B, while the 1 and 3 month time points were profiled on HEMP V1.0 arrays and shown in Figure 5E.    All samples were run once with no replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL14638 Utz Lab Whole Protein Autoantigen Array V2.0

CITATIONS
22300536

