TITLE
Differential gene expression of Vicia species using a soybean cDNA microarray

ORGANISM
Glycine max ; Vicia villosa ; Vicia pannonica

SUMMARY
Hairy vetch (Vicia villosa Roth) is recognized as a beneficial winter cover crop in the Midwestern U.S.  DNA microarrays are used for assessing gene expression significance.  The objective of the study was to identify a set of genes expressed in hairy vetch, that could be further analyzed for their potential in improving the crop.  The RNA of four targets (soybean (Glycine max), hairy vetch, Vicia pannonica PI 170008, and Vicia pannonica PI 515988) were purified, labeled, and hybridized to 142 cDNA clones of biotic stress genes and gene sequences of soybean that were robotically spotted onto aminosilicated slides with duplicate spots and three arrays per slide.  The microarray experiments were completed in a reference design experiment incorporating a two-dye system.  The data were analyzed using the individual fluorescence intensities to fit two statistical models in a mixed model analysis of variance.  In this analysis, systematic error effects were observed to account for 24% of the total variation.  The use of a Bonferroni adjusted significance threshold allowed for adequate control over the number of falsely identified significant genes showing expression in the different target comparisons.  We observed that 64 of the 142 gene sequences (45%) were differentially expressed in at least one of the target comparisons.  Two of these expressed genes in hairy vetch encoded for a cold tolerance indicator, proline, and two other gene sequences encode for stress tolerance indicators, myo-inositol and calmodulin.  A soybean cDNA microarray was used effectively to differentiate gene expression in hairy vetch. Keywords: comparative genomic hybridization (cross-species)

DESIGN
In this study, the targets consist of the 4 sources of RNA, Soybean cultivar Burlison (Glycine max), Common Hairy Vetch (Vicia villosa),  Vicia pannonica PI 170008, and Vicia pannonica PI 515988.  The four targets were hybridized in a reference design with dye-label swap, where the common hairy vetch target served as the reference sample.  There were three independent replications.

PLATFORM
GPL2665 The Use of a Soybean cDNA Microarray to Assess for Differential Gene Expression in Vicia Species: A Mixed Model Approach

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

