TITLE
Gene expression profiling of dendritic cells derived from bone marrow (BM-DC) in response to myxoma virus infection.

ORGANISM
Ovis aries

SUMMARY
Background : Poxviruses have been shown to be efficient vectors for the production of protective immune responses in host species but also in on host species. Myxoma virus belongs to poxviridae family. In order to evaluate the capacity of (MYXV)  as a vaccine vector in ruminants, we invistigated its interactions with bone marrow-derived  dendritic cells (BM-DC). DCs  are the most potent antigen-presenting cells and play a crucial role during the priming and reactivation of antigen-specific immune responses . Following infection by a pathogen, the functional changes of DC are essential since priming and polarization of the immune response depend on these changes . Therefore a better understanding of the modifications in gene expression of proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines and stimulatory molecules expression may prove useful in predicting whether or not a vaccine vector will be effective. Moreover, it may help identifying modifications for improving its efficacy.  Methodology/Principal Findings: We investigated in vitro the interactions between recombinant MYXV expressing GFP protein, SG33-GFP and ovine BM-DCs. To gain a global view of the gene remodelling induced by MYXV, we infected BM-DCs from three sheep with  SG33-GFP at different multiplicity of infection (MOI) (0, 1, 3) during different time (0, 3, 8 hours).  We measured the expression of 15K probes in BM-DCs after each kind of conditions with ovine Agilent microarrays. Furthermore, a selected number of genes were confirmed by RT-qPCR. MYXV infection induces a strong reprogramming of the cells leading to the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and mobilisation of type I IFN pathways, cellular death and features associated with the activation of the adaptive immune response.  Conclusion/Significance:  Microarray profiling of a poxvirus-DC interaction help to delineate some interesting features of a vector candidate in ovine, and pave the way for additional improvements of a promising platform. Keywords : Myxoma virus ; bone marrow-derived dendritic cells ; transcriptome ; sheep; vaccine

DESIGN
9 samples: 3 time points and 3 replicates of MOI=1

PLATFORM
GPL10427 Agilent-019921 Sheep Gene Expression Microarray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
21835800

