TITLE
Transport of influenza A virus neuraminidase to host cell surface and virus replication are regulated by ARHGAP21 and Cdc42

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Influenza virus neuraminidase (NA), a type II transmembrane glycoprotein, is transported to the virus assembly site at the plasma membrane and is a major viral envelope component that plays a critical role in the release of progeny virions and in determination of host range restriction. Although signals/sequences in NA for translocation, sorting and raft association have been identified, little is known about the host factors that are involved in regulating the intracellular and cell surface transport of NA. In this report, we have investigated the involvement of Rho family GTPases in NA transport to the cell surface. We found that expression of constitutively active or inactive mutants of RhoA or Rac1 did not significantly affect the amount of NA that reached the cell surface. Interestingly, expression of constitutively active Cdc42 or depletion of the Cdc42-specific GAP, ARHGAP21, promoted the transport of NA to the plasma membranes. By contrast, cells expressing shRNA targrting Cdc42 or overexpressing ARHGAP21 exhibited a significant decrease in the amount of cell surface-localized NA. Furthermore, silencing of Cdc42 or ARHGAP21 had significant effects on influenza A virus replication. Together, our results reveal that ARHGAP21 and Cdc42-based signaling regulates the NA transport and thereby impacts virus replication. This microarray experiment was carried out to find out whether Cdc42 and ARHGAP21 expression levels in A549 cell were changed after WSN infection.

DESIGN
Total RNAs were extracted from three different groups of A549 cells that had been infected with or without WSN for 10 h, using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Samples were amplified and labeled using a NimbleGen One-Color DNA Labeling Kit.

PLATFORM
GPL14715 NimbleGen Human 100309_AS_human_100426_pz array [gene-level version]

CITATIONS
22318733 , 24829357

