TITLE
Interaction between gibberellins and brassinosteroids during etiolated growth in Arabidopsis.

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
The proper transition between the skotomorphogenic and photomorphogenic developmental programs is key for seedling survival and it is therefore tightly regulated. Besides light, which is the major cue that triggers this transition, several hormone pathways participate in this control, mainly antagonizing the light effect. Two of these hormones are gibberellins (GA) and brassinosteroids (BR). Both hormones promote the skotomorphogenesis and prevent photomorphogenesis, as evidenced by the partially de-etiolated phenotype caused by GA or BR deficiency, or by a blockage in the respective signaling pathways. We have previously shown that BR mediate GA activity in the control of this transition. For instance, treatment of dark-grown, GA-deficient seedlings with BRs was able to partially restore morphological phenotypes such as hypocotyl growth, and importantly to restore completely the molecular phenotype of CAB2 and RbcS gene expression. On the contrary, GA-treatment did not alter the same phenotypes in the BR deficient det2 mutant. Thus, the aim of this study was to investigate to what extent BRs mediate GA activity in dark-grown seedlings, and for that purpose we have the examined global changes in gene expression caused by treatment with GA and BRs in BR- and GA-deficient seedlings, respectively.

DESIGN
We performed two sets of experiments, each one including three different samples. The first experiment included dark-grown, WT Col-0 mock-treated seedlings, or seedlings treated with either the GA biosynthesis inhibitor paclobutrazol (PAC) or with PAC+epibrassinolide (EBR). In this experiment, PAC samples were labelled with Cy3 and compared to WT and PAC+EBR samples, which were labelled with Cy5. Two biological repeast were performed. The second experiment included dark-grown, WT Col-0 seedlings and the det2-1 mutant, which was either mock-treated or treated with GA3. Two biological replicates were performed, in the first one the WT and det2-1+GA3 were labelled with Cy3 and the det2-1 sample with Cy5. The reverse labelling was used in the second replicate.

PLATFORM
GPL4650 Galbraith Laboratory Operon Long Oligonucleotide Microarray Version 1.0 (AtOligo 3.1.2.Y and AtOligio 3.2.2.Y)

CITATIONS
22847438

