TITLE
Genome-wide transcriptional profiling of the cell envelope stress response of Listeria monocytogenes

ORGANISM
Listeria monocytogenes

SUMMARY
The Gram-positive bacterium Listeria monocytogenes is widely distributed in the environment and capable of causing food-borne infections in susceptible individuals. In this study, we investigated the cell envelope stress response in L. monocytogenes. Whole-genome transcriptional profiling was performed to investigate the response upon exposure to the cell wall antibiotic cefuroxime. Differential expression (≥ 2-fold difference) of 558 genes was observed, corresponding to 20% of the L. monocytogenes genome. The majority of genes strongly induced by cefuroxime exposure have cell envelope-related functions, including the dlt-operon, genes encoding penicillin-binding proteins, and members from the LiaRS regulon. The virulence-associated genes dacA and lmo2714 were up-regulated upon cefuroxime exposure, whereas PrfA-regulated virulence genes, required for invasion and intracellular replication, were repressed. A large overlap was observed between the cefuroxime stimulon and genes known to be induced in L. monocytogenes in blood and during intracellular infection, indicating that the cell envelope stress response is active at various stages of the infectious process. Genes involved in stress tolerance (htrA, ctc) and signal transduction (lisRK) were also found among the highly up-regulated genes. We analysed the roles of the two-component systems LisRK and CesRK, showing that activation of the most highly cefuroxime-induced genes was LisR- and CesR-dependent. Using genetic analyses, we showed that several genes of the cefuroxime stimulon contribute to the innate resistance of L. monocytogenes to cefuroxime and tolerance to other cell envelope-perturbing conditions. Collectively, these findings demonstrate central roles for LisRK and CesRK in orchestrating the cell envelope stress response in L. monocytogenes.

DESIGN
Cefuroxime induced expression was measured in the wildtype, lisR deletion mutant and, cesR deletion mutant after 60 minutes of exposure and compared to unexposed control samples. Multiple technical and biological replicates where analyzed with or without the dyes-swapped.

PLATFORM
GPL14687 Agilent-018359 TIFN_Listeria monocytogenes EGD-e_15K_v2.0

CITATIONS
22282521

