TITLE
Nonlesional atopic dermatitis skin is characterized by broad terminal differentiation defects and variable immune abnormalities

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a common inflammatory skin disease with a T(H)2 and T22 immune polarity. Despite recent data showing a genetic predisposition to epidermal barrier defects in some patients, a fundamental debate still exists regarding the role of barrier abnormalities versus immune responses in initiating the disease. An extensive study of nonlesional AD (ANL) skin is necessary to explore whether there is an intrinsic predisposition to barrier abnormalities, background immune activation, or both in patients with AD. We sought to characterize ANL skin by determining whether epidermal differentiation and immune abnormalities that characterize lesional AD (AL) skin are also reflected in ANL skin.  We performed genomic and histologic profiling of both ANL and AL skin lesions (n = 12 each) compared with normal human skin (n = 10). We found that ANL skin is clearly distinct from normal skin with respect to terminal differentiation and some immune abnormalities and that it has a cutaneous expansion of T cells. We also showed that ANL skin has a variable immune phenotype, which is largely determined by disease extent and severity. Whereas broad terminal differentiation abnormalities were largely similar between involved and uninvolved AD skin, perhaps accounting for the background skin phenotype, increased expression of immune-related genes was among the most obvious differences between AL and ANL skin, potentially reflecting the clinical disease phenotype. Our study implies that systemic immune activation might play a role in alteration of the normal epidermal phenotype, as suggested by the high correlation in expression of immune genes in ANL skin with the disease severity index.

DESIGN
Genomic profile of paired samples of  ANL and AL skin lesions from 12 patients compared with normal human skin (n = 8). For some patients, only 1 sample was available.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21388663

