TITLE
Gene expression profiling of primary canine insulinomas and their metastases

ORGANISM
Canis lupus familiaris

SUMMARY
Insulinomas (INS) are rare pancreatic endocrine tumours (PETs), arising from tumoral beta-cells from the pancreatic islets of Langerhans. Canine INS are malignant in > 95% of cases. This study aims to provide further insights on molecular pathways involved in INS pathogenesis and to identify prognostic genes. Canine specific cDNA microarray representing 20,313 genes was used to analyze expression profiles in a panel of ten primary INS and ten INS metastases. Eighty-four genes were found to be significantly down-regulated in the group of metastases in comparison to the group of primary INS. From the microarray analysis it also followed that primary INS, based on their gene expression profiles, can be divided into two groups, which differ in their malignancy potential. It was also demonstrated that canine INS have both endocrine and exocrine cell features. Furthermore, the present study has revealed pancreatic lipase and chymotrypsinogen B1 as candidate genes that can be followed up in prospective studies as prognostic markers for INS. Our findings add to the current knowledge of INS pathogenesis and tumor progression, which can be used for future therapeutic and prognostic strategies, for both dogs and humans.

DESIGN
From 1993 to 2009, ten histologically confirmed primary insulinomas (INS) and their accompanying metastases were obtained from dogs that were presented at the Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals of the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine of Utrecht University. Tumors were resected by experienced surgeons, and fragments (5-15 mm diameter) for RNA extraction were carefully removed from the central portion of the tumors to avoid contamination with normal adjacent tissue. Tissue specimens collected for RNA isolation were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately after surgical removal and stored at  70oC. Various clinical and pathological parameters were evaluated retrospectively for the dogs included in this study. Half of both the primary insulinoma samples, as well as half of the metastasis samples was labelled with Cy3, while the other half of both groups was labelled with Cy5. A common reference cRNA pool consisting of equal quantity of cRNA from all 20 tumor samples was used to hybridize against each sample on the array.

PLATFORM
GPL5117 UMC_VET Canis familiaris 21K cDNA array

CITATIONS
23428643

