TITLE
Ovarian transcriptomics over a complete breeding cycle in wild Largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides) characterizes pathways underlying oocyte maturation and atresia

ORGANISM
Micropterus salmoides

SUMMARY
Background: Follicular growth and maturation in semi-synchronously spawning fish involve numerous cell signaling cascades and different molecular cascades are activated or inhibited during specific stages of oocyte development. The objectives of the current study were to identify molecular pathways and temporal gene expression patterns throughout a complete breeding cycle in female wild LMB to characterize the molecular sequence of events underlying follicle and ovary development.  Methods: Microarray analysis was performed on eight morphologically distinct stages, from primary stages of oocyte growth to ovulation and atresia. Ovarian tissue histology, plasma vitellogenin, and sex steroids (E2 and T) were also measured to correlate molecular signaling cascades to higher levels of biological organization. Results: Global expression patterns revealed dramatic differences between early and late stages of ovarian follicle progression, with over 200 and 500 genes being differentially expressed during both ovulation and atresia respectively (p < 0.01). Time course analysis for all stages leading to ovulation and atresia identified increased expression of GABAA receptor subunits and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma during ovulation.  Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed that early stages of oocyte growth involved increases in pathways of natural killer cell and mast cell activation, as well as gap junction regulation. GSEA revealed that arachidonic acid metabolism was significantly up-regulated while CD2, fibronectin, and neuropeptides Y receptor signaling cascades were down-regulated at ovulation.  Expression targets for LH signaling were decreased during vitellogenesis but increased at ovulation. GSEA revealed decreases in actin cytoskeleton regulation and receptor mediated signaling pathways involving TGFβ and ephrin receptor regulation at atresia. Conclusions: This study offers new insight into the molecular pathways involved in vitellogenesis, ovulation and atresia in LMB and provides new hypotheses about the cellular pathways involved in oocyte growth and maturation.

DESIGN
31 microarrays on 8 unique stages of ovary development; developmental profile time course, development of LMB ovary

PLATFORM
GPL13229 LMB microarray 15K (Agilent format)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

