TITLE
Whole-genome mapping of MEIS1, TET1, H3K4me2 and H3K27ac in P19.6 mouse embryonal carcinoma cells and P19.6 cells treated for 48 hours with all-trans retinoic acid

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Enhancers are developmentally-controlled transcriptional regulatory regions whose activities are modulated through histone modifications or histone variant deposition. Here, we show by genome-wide mapping that the newly discovered DNA modification 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) is dynamically associated with transcription factor binding to distal regulatory sites during neural differentiation of mouse P19 cells as well as during adipocyte differentiation of mouse 3T3-L1 cells. Functional annotation reveals that regions gaining 5hmC are associated with genes expressed either in neural tissues when P19 cells undergo neural differentiation or in adipose tissue when 3T3-L1 cells undergo adipocyte differentiation. Furthermore, distal regions gaining 5hmC together with H3K4me2 and H3K27ac in P19 cells behave as differentiation-dependent transcriptional enhancers. Identified regions are enriched in motifs for transcription factors regulating specific cell fates like Meis1 in P19 cells and PPARgamma in 3T3-L1 cells. Accordingly, a fraction of hydroxymethylated Meis1 sites were associated with a dynamic engagement of the 5mC hydroxylase Tet1. In addition, kinetic studies of cytosine hydroxymethylation of selected enhancers indicated that DNA hydroxymethylation is an early event of enhancer activation. Hence, acquisition of 5hmC in cell-specific distal regulatory regions may represent a major event of enhancer progression toward an active state and participate in selective activation of tissue-specific genes

DESIGN
MEIS1 and H3K27ac genome-wide distributions were determined using ChIP-seq. Cells used in this study are P19.6 mouse embryonal carnicoma cells and P19.6 cells treated for 48 hours with 1µM all-trans retinoic acid (RA). ChIP samples were done by Sérandour A.A. Libraries were prepared and sequenced by the IGBMC sequencing facility (Strasbourg, France) by an Illumina Genome Analyzer II.

