TITLE
microRNA expression in autonomous thyroid adenomas: correlation with mRNA regulation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
MicroRNA (miRNA) are a class of small non-coding RNAs that act on the stability and the translation efficiency of their mRNA targets. Several evidences suggest that they play a role in tumorigenesis. So far, all types of thyroid tumors have been studied for miRNA expression except autonomous adenomas (AA), benign tumors characterized by the constitutive activation of the cAMP-dependent pathway, leading to a functional hyperactivity of the tissues. The objective of the study was to identify the deregulated miRNA in AA and to correlate the data with mRNA regulation observed in the same samples. AA and their corresponding adjacent tissues were hybridized on miRNA and mRNA microarrays. In order to investigate the correlation between both datasets and to identify mRNA regulations, bioinformatic mRNA target prediction softwares were used. 12 miRNAs were found as downregulated and 1 as upregulated in the tumors. Members of 3 different miR-families (miR-19, miR-29 and miR-135 families) were found among the regulated miRNA. By bioinformatic predictions we searched, among the mRNA microarray data, for regulated mRNA which could be targeted by the modulated miRNA. A great enrichment in mRNA encoding proteins involved in the extracellular matrix organization, as well as different phosphodiesterases were identified among the putative targets. The global miRNA profiles are not greatly modified, confirming the definition of these tumors as minimal deviation tumors. These results support a role for miRNA in ECM regulation and tissue remodelling occurring during tumor development, as well as in the retrocontrol of the activated cAMP pathway.

DESIGN
7 tumors hybridized in dey-swap, compared to thier adjacent normal tissues.

PLATFORM
GPL14760 IRIBHM-human-miRNA(V.11.0)-Exiqon GPL14838 HEEBO Human 48.5K Microarrays Inc

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

