TITLE
Aging extraocular muscles: shifts in gene expression patterns

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
The fast and constant activity of the extraocular muscles (EOMs) impose mechanical and metabolic stresses not typically seen in limb skeletal muscles.  These functional properties may explain why EOMs seem to age at a faster rate than other skeletal muscles.  Using high-density cDNA microarrays, this study investigated the gene expression profile of EOMs and extensor digitorum longus muscles (EDL) of Fischer 344/Brown Norway F1 hybrid rats at 6-, 18- and 30-months of age.  At 6-mo, 705 genes and expressed sequence tags (ESTs) were differentially expressed in EOMs (436 up, 269 down).  Overall, the EOM profile at this age was mostly consistent with the increased expression of fetal, developmental and EOM-specific myosin isoforms, enzymes involved in glycolysis and TCA cycle, and ion transporters and pumps, confirming the notion that EOM may represent a distinct muscle group (PNAS 98:12062, 2001).  Interestingly, at 18-mo only 36 probes were significantly different in EOM (15 up, 21 down), most of them ESTs.  However, at 30-mo EOMs had 655 differentially expressed genes and ESTs (480 up, 175 down).  In this age group, the EOM expression profile reverted to a pattern similar to that found at 6-mo, with evidence of ongoing tissue remodeling and increased expression of antioxidant enzymes.  These results indicate that the gene expression profile of EOM and EDL evolve differently throughout the lifespan. Keywords: aging, muscle type comparison

DESIGN
Total RNA was obtained with TRIzol (Invitrogen Carlsbad, CA) following the manufacturers recommended protocol. Tissues from 4 animals were combined into each RNA sample to decrease inter-subject variability. Biotinylated cRNA samples were hybridized to Affymetrix Rat Genome U34 gene chips (n=24 chips) described previously [McMullen et al. 2004]. Microarrays were washed and stained with a streptavidin-bound marker and scanned. Data were analyzed with Affymetrix Microarray Suite 5.0 software. Only genes with consistent absent/present calls in all four independent replicates per group were considered for further analysis. Comparisons the one-sided Wilcoxon’s signed rank test to estimate “increase/no change/ decrease” difference calls for each pair-wise comparison. Only difference calls consistent in all pair-wise comparisons and with average changes > 2.00 were considered significant, resulting in a conservative list of genes with changed expression levels. Functional classification of genes was based on an extensive literature review.

PLATFORM
GPL85 [RG_U34A] Affymetrix Rat Genome U34 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

