TITLE
Salinomycin induces cell death and differentiation in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma stem cells despite activation of EMT and Akt

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Cancer stem cells are believed to play a crucial role in cancer recurrence due to their resistance to conventional chemotherapy and capacity for self-renewal. Recent studies have reported that salinomycin, a livestock antibiotic, selectively targets breast cancer stem cells 100-fold more effectively than paclitaxel. In our study we sought to determine the effects of salinomycin on head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) stem cells. We show that salinomycin is able to decrease cell viability and induce apoptosis. In combination with the chemotherapeutic agents cisplatin and paclitaxel, salinomycin synergistically killed HNSCC cancer stem cells more effectively than either drug alone. Furthermore, we observed that salinomycin decreases stem cell properties as shown by a significant reduction in sphere formation and a decrease of both CD44 and BMI-1. Contrary to expectations, salinomycin caused an induction of EMT as shown by an increase in Snail and Vimentin, and a decrease in E-cadherin expression. Even though EMT was induced, salinomycin caused a decrease in invasion through a membrane. In search of a possible mechanism, the effects on the Akt pathway were explored. Interestingly, salinomycin also induced phosphorylation of Akt. Activation of EMT and Akt are both tightly associated with an increase in stemness, which brings to question the relationship between CSCs and these two fundamental pathways. Taken together, our findings indicate that salinomycin shows promise as a novel treatment for HNSCC despite an activation of EMT and Akt.

DESIGN
MicroRNA obtained from JLO-1 cells treated for 48 hours in varying doses of salinomycin. Changes in microRNA expression are analyzed by normalizing expression values with the control sample.

PLATFORM
GPL8179 Illumina Human v2 MicroRNA expression beadchip

CITATIONS
23176396

