TITLE
Micro-Array Profiling Exhibits Remarkable Intra-Individual Stability of Human Platelet micro-RNA

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Results: MiRNA expression profiling of 1281 human miRNAs revealed relevant expression of 221 miRNAs consistently expressed in all samples at all time points. Correlation of platelet miRNA ranks was highly significant with data from other studies. Global distribution of miRNA expression was relatively similar in all subjects. No miRNA exhibited a significant effect of time at level 0.05. This finding was supported by exploratory analysis of predicted time effects from the mixed effects models. Furthermore, no significant effect of ASA could be found. Concerning the functional implication of the 20 most abundantly expressed miRNAs, we found 6 functional themes: nuclear import, cell cycle, transmembrane receptor protein serine/threonine kinase signaling pathway, regulation of kinase activity, pathways in cancer, and leukocyte differentiation. Conclusion: Our study shows that the platelet miRNA profile is remarkably stable in healthy subjects and is not affected by single-dose ASA treatment. For this reason, single-point analysis of platelet miRNA profile is reasonable when inter-individual differences are studied. The functional annotation network points toward additional extra-platelet effects of platelet miRNAs.

DESIGN
We assessed the platelet miRNA profile blood in 5 volunteers at five time points over a time course of 10 days; 24 h prior to the last blood sampling, all subjects took 500 mg acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) once. Platelet miRNA was isolated from platelet-rich plasma which was leucocyte-depleted by negative bead separation. Then miRNA array analysis was performed on the isolated platelet miRNA. Temporal patterns and the effect of ASA were explored by a linear mixed effects model for each miRNA. For the 20 most abundantly expressed platelet miRNAs, a target gene search was performed by using miRWalk for validated and predicted targets. To visualize which molecular functions arerelated to those miRNAs, an annotation network was created by ClueGO, a Cytoscape plug-in.

