TITLE
Genome-Wide binding sites of two MADS-domain transcription factors SOC1 and SVP in Arabidopsis during the floral transition

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
The floral transition in Arabidopsis is tightly controlled by complex genetic regulatory networks in response to endogenous and environmental flowering signals. SUPPRESSOR OF OVEREXPRESSION OF CONSTANS 1 (SOC1) and SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE (SVP), two key MADS-domain transcription factors, perceive these signals and function as antagonistic flowering regulators. To understand how they mediate the floral transition, we mapped in vivo binding sites of SOC1 and SVP using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by hybridization to whole-genome tiling arrays (ChIP-chip). Genes encoding proteins with transcription regulator activity and transcription factor activity were the most enriched groups of genes bound by SOC1 and SVP, indicating their central roles in flowering regulatory networks. In combination with gene expression microarray studies, we further identified the genes whose expression was directly regulated by SOC1 or SVP. Among the common direct targets identified, APETALA2 (AP2)-like genes that repress FT and SOC1 expression were downregulated by SOC1, but upregulated by SVP, revealing a complex feedback regulation among key genes determining the integration of flowering signals. SOC1 regulatory regions were also accessed by SOC1 itself and SVP, suggesting that self-activation and repression by SVP contribute to the regulation of SOC1 expression. In addition, ChIP-chip analysis demonstrated that miR156e and miR172a, which are involved in the regulation of AP2-like genes, were direct targets of SOC1 and SVP, respectively. Taken together, these findings reveal that feedback regulatory loops mediated by SOC1 and SVP are essential components of the gene regulatory networks underpinning the integration of flowering signals during the floral transition.

DESIGN
soc1-101D and 35S:SVP ChIPed with SOC1 or SVP polyclonal antibody respectively vs. soc1-2 or svp-41 in Arabidopsis 9-day-old whole seedlings

PLATFORM
GPL10977 [At35b_MR] Affymetrix Arabidopsis Tiling 1.0R Array

CITATIONS
22268548

