TITLE
Detection of immunogenic proteins from bacteria

ORGANISM
Campylobacter jejuni

SUMMARY
Detection of immunogenic proteins remains an important task for life sciences as it nourishes the understanding of pathogenicity, illuminates new potential vaccine candidates and broadens the spectrum of biomarkers applicable in diagnostic tools. Traditionally, immunoscreenings of expression libraries via polyclonal sera on nitrocellulose membranes or screenings of whole proteome lysates in 2-D gel electrophoresis are performed. However, these methods feature some rather inconvenient disadvantages. Screening of expression libraries to expose novel antigens from bacteria often lead to an abundance of false positive signals owing to the high cross reactivity of polyclonal antibodies towards the proteins of the expression host. A method is presented that overcomes many disadvantages of the old procedures. We incorporated a fusion tag prior to our genes of interest and attached the expressed fusion proteins covalently on microarrays. This enhances the specific binding of the proteins compared to nitrocellulose. Thus, it helps to reduce the number of false positives significantly. It enables us to screen for immunogenic proteins in a shorter time, with more samples and statistical reliability. We validated our method by employing several known genes from Campylobacter jejuni NCTC 11168. Four of proteins that have previously been described as immunogenic have successfully been assessed immunogenic abilities with our method. One protein with no known immunogenic behaviour before suggested potential immunogenicity. The method presented offers a new approach for screening of bacterial expression libraries to illuminate novel proteins with immunogenic features. It could provide a powerful and attractive alternative to existing methods and help to detect and identify bacterial virulence factors, vaccine candidates and potential biomarkers.

DESIGN
The overall study was done with five technical replicates. Ten proteins derived from Campylobacter jejuni were tested regarding their immunogenic potential. The ten proteins derived from Campylobacter jejuni were fusion proteins, i.e., N-terminal HaloTag fused to: Gene < -- > Protein cjaA < -- > putative amino-acid transporter periplasmic solute-binding protein hisJ < -- > histidine-binding protein precursor pal < -- > peptidoglycan associated lipoprotein flaC < -- > flagellin flaA < -- > flagellin peb1a < -- > bifunctional adhesin/ABC transporter aspartate/glutamate-binding protein pyrC < -- > dihydroorotase (EC:3.5.2.3) pseB < -- > UDP-GlcNAc-specific C4,6 dehydratase/C5 epimerase gapA < -- > glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (EC:1.2.1.12) argC < -- > N-acetyl-gamma-glutamyl-phosphate reductase (EC:1.2.1.38)

PLATFORM
GPL14800 IBMT Campylobacter jejuni Halolink fusion-protein array

CITATIONS
22436172

