TITLE
Sexually Dimorphic Gene Expression in the Adult Mouse Hypothalamus and Bed Nucleus of the Stria Terminalis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
To identify genes that are downstream of gonadal hormones and that control dimorphic behaviors, we used a MEEBO array platform to profile gene expression of adult male and female hypothalamus against a whole brain reference sample. The experimental design allowed us to identify genes that are upreguated in the hypothalamus compared to the whole brain and are dimorphically expressed between the two sexes. In situ hybridization of candiate genes were carried out to validate the dimorphic expression of these genes in the hypothalamus. Array results were used to create a list of genes to screen by in situ hybridization. For each normalization method, a list of genes that were upregulated in the male or the female was created, and a gene had to be on a set number of these individual normalization lists in order to be considered for screening. A similar method was used to create a list of hypothalamic upregulated genes. The final screening list was comprised of genes that were upregulated in the male or female as well as in the hypothalamus. If in situ hybridization proved that the gene was upregulated in the male or female brain, we concluded that that transcript was differentially expressed. No one normalization method was weighted over another, and the array results were used to create a screening list for in situ hybridizations.

DESIGN
Hypothalami from 4 adult animals of each sex were microdissected and pooled for each experimental sample and the whole brain plus pituitary from one male and one female were pooled to provide the reference sample. Each set of samples (male and female) was hybridized to two arrays to provide two technical replicates for each set of samples taken. A total of three sets of samples were taken (three biological replicates). For the " _amp " Samples, source (hypothalamus and whole brain) mRNA was amplified using T7 based method. For this set, data were not normalized, rather the raw intensities were used to calculate ratios. Candidate genes from this study was also included in final list in situ screening.

PLATFORM
GPL3876 UCSF Mus musculus 39K 15Mm MEEBO Oligo Array

CITATIONS
22304924

