TITLE
Combined Expression Trait Correlations and Expression Quantitative Trait Locus Mapping

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Coordinated regulation of gene expression levels across a series of experimental conditions provides valuable information about the functions of correlated transcripts. To map gene regulatory pathways, we used microarray-derived gene expression measurements in 60 individuals of an F2 sample segregating for diabetes. We performed correlation analysis among ~40,000 expression traits. By combining correlation among expression traits and linkage mapping information, we were able to identify regulatory networks, make functional predictions to uncharacterized genes, and characterize novel members of known pathways. Using 36 seed traits, we found evidence of coordinate regulation of 160 G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) pathway expression traits. Of the 160 traits, 50 had their major LOD peak within 8 cM of a locus on chromosome 2, and 81 others had a secondary peak in this region. A previously uncharacterized Riken cDNA clone, which showed strong correlation with stearoyl CoA desaturase 1 expression, was experimentally validated to be responsive to conditions that regulate lipid metabolism. Using linkage mapping, we identified multiple genes whose expression is under the control of transcription regulatory loci. Trait-correlation combined with linkage mapping can reveal regulatory networks that would otherwise be missed if we only studied mRNA traits with statistically significant linkages in this small cross. The combined analysis is more sensitive compared with linkage mapping only. References: Kendziorski C., M. Chen, M. Yuan, H. Lan, and A.D. Attie. Statistical Methods for Expression Quantitative Trait Loci (eQTL) Mapping. Biometrics, to appear, 2005. Lan H, Chen M, Flowers JB, Yandell BS, Stapleton DS, et al. (2006) Combined Expression Trait Correlations and Expression Quantitative Trait Locus Mapping. PLoS Genet 2(1): e6. Keywords: Genetics of gene expression

DESIGN
The F2-ob/ob mice were chosen from a mapping panel that we created to map diabetes related physiological phenotypes (Stoehr et al. 2000). About 110 of these F2-ob/ob mice were also used to map mRNA abundance traits derived by quantitative real-time RT-PCR (Lan et al. 2003). The sixty F2-ob/ob mice that were used to generate microarray-derived mRNA abundance traits were selected from the 110 mice based on a selective phenotyping algorithm (Jin et al. 2004). The F2-ob/ob mice were housed at weaning at the University of Wisconsin-Madison animal care facility on a 12-h light/dark cycle. Mice were provided Purina Formulab Chow 5008 (6.5% fat) and acidified water ad libitum. Mice were killed at 14 weeks of age by CO2 asphyxiation after a 4-hour fast. The livers, along with other tissues, were immediately foil wrapped and frozen in liquid nitrogen, and subsequently transferred to -80 °C freezers for storage. Liver samples were taken from 29 male and 31 females. Total RNA was isolated with RNAzol Reagent (Tel-Test, Inc.) using a modification of the single-step acid guanidinium isothiocyanate phenol-chloroform extraction method according to the manufacturer's protocol. The extracted RNA was purified using RNeasy (Qiagen, Inc.). RNA samples were evaluated by UV spectroscopy for concentration. RNA quality was monitored by visualization on an ethidium bromide-stained denaturing formaldehyde agarose gel. RNA samples were converted to cDNA, and then biotin-labeled cRNA according to Affymetrix Expression Analysis Technical Manual. The labeled samples were hybridized to the M430A, and subsequently the M430B array. The hybridization, washing and scanning steps were carried out by Hong Lan using the Affymetrix core facility at the Gene Expression Center of University of Wisconsin-Madison.

PLATFORM
GPL339 [MOE430A] Affymetrix Mouse Expression 430A Array GPL340 [MOE430B] Affymetrix Mouse Expression 430B Array

CITATIONS
16424919

