TITLE
Integrative Molecular Analysis of Intrahepatic Cholangiocarcinoma Reveals 2 Classes That Have Different Outcomes

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Cholangiocarcinoma, the second most common liver cancer, can be classified as intrahepatic (ICC) or extrahepatic. We performed an integrative genomic analysis of ICC samples from a large series of patients. METHODS: We performed gene expression profile, high-density single nucleotide polymorphism array, and mutation analyses using formalin-fixed ICC samples from 149 patients. Associations with clinico-pathological traits and patient outcomes were examined for 119 cases. Class discovery was based on a non-negative matrix factorization algorithm and significant copy number variations (CNV) were identified by GISTIC analysis. Gene set enrichment analysis was used to identify signaling pathways activated in specific molecular classes of tumors, and to analyze their genomic overlap with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). RESULTS: We identified 2 main biological classes of ICC. The inflammation class (38% of ICCs) is characterized by activation of inflammatory signaling pathways, overexpression of cytokines, and STAT3 activation. The proliferation class (62%) is characterized by activation of oncogenic signaling pathways (including RAS, mitogen-activated protein kinase, and MET), DNA amplifications at 11q13.2, deletions at 14q22.1, mutations in KRAS and BRAF, and gene expression signatures previously associated with poor outcomes for patients with HCC. CNV-based clustering was able to further refine these molecular groups. We identified high-level amplifications in 5 regions, including 1p13 (9%) and 11q13.2 (4%), and several focal deletions, such as 9p21.3 (18%) and 14q22.1 (12% in coding regions for the SAV1 tumor suppressor). In a complementary approach, we identified a gene expression signature that was associated with reduced survival times of patients with ICC; this signature was enriched in the proliferation class (P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: We used an integrative genomic analysis to identify 2 classes of ICC. The proliferation class has specific copy number alterations, many features of the poor-prognosis signatures for HCC, and is associated with worse outcome. Different classes of ICC, based on molecular features, might therefore require different treatment approaches. This SuperSeries is composed of the SubSeries listed below.

DESIGN
Refer to individual Series

