TITLE
Transcriptional profiling of the host cutaneous response to Ixodes scapularis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Introduction: Ixodes scapularis ticks are hematophagous arthropods capable of transmitting many infectious agents to humans. The process of blood feeding is an extended and continuous interplay between tick and host responses. While this process has been studied extensively in vitro, no global understanding of the host response to ticks has emerged. To address this issue, we measured skin-specific expression of 233 discrete genes at 8 time points during primary and secondary infestations of mice with pathogen-free I. scapularis nymphs. Selected results were then validated at the mRNA and protein levels. Results: Primary infestation was characterized by the late induction of an innate immune response. Lectin pattern recognition receptors, cytokines, and chemokines were upregulated consistent with increased neutrophil and macrophage migration. Gene ontology and pathway analyses of downregulated genes suggested inhibition of gene transcription and Th17 immunity. During the secondary infestation, additional genes were modulated suggesting a broader involvement of immune cells including CD8 and CD4 positive T lymphocytes. The cytokine response showed a mixed Th1/Th2 profile with a potential for T regulatory cell activity. Key gene ontology clusters observed during the secondary infestation were cell migration and activation. Matrix metalloproteinases were upregulated, apoptosis-related genes were differentially modulated, and immunoreceptor signaling molecules were upregulated. In contrast, transcripts related to mitogenic, WNT, Hedgehog, and stress pathways were downregulated. Conclusions: Our results support a model of tick feeding where lectin pattern recognition receptors orchestrate an innate inflammatory response during primary infestation that primes a mixed Th1/Th2 response upon secondary exposure. Tick feeding inhibits gene transcription and Th17 immunity. Salivary molecules may also inhibit upregulation of mitogenic, WNT, Hedgehog, and stress pathways and enhance the activity of T regulatory cells, production of IL-10, and suppressors of cytokine signaling molecules (SOCS). This study provides the first comprehensive transcriptional analysis of the host response at the tick bite site and suggests both a potential model of the host cutaneous response and candidate genes for further description and investigation.

DESIGN
Ear biopsies from BALB/cJ mice infested with Ixodes scapularis nymphs were assayed at 12, 48, 72, and 96 hours after infestation during a primary and secondary exposure. 3 mice were measured at each time point. Controls were 3 similarly housed but tick-free mice.

PLATFORM
GPL14815 Mouse Th17 for Autoimmunity & Inflammation RT² Profiler™ PCR Array GPL14816 Mouse Signal Transduction PathwayFinder RT² Profiler™ PCR Array GPL14817 Mouse Extracellular Matrix and Adhesion Molecules RT² Profiler™ PCR Array

CITATIONS
22309607

