TITLE
Screening ethnically diverse human embryonic stem cells identifies a chromosome 20 minimal amplicon conferring growth advantage

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The International Stem Cell Initiative analyzed 127 human embryonic stem cell lines and 11 induced pluripotent cell lines, from 39 laboratories worldwide for genetic changes occurring during culture.  Most cell lines were analyzed at an early and late passage.  Population structure analysis from SNP detection revealed that the cell lines included representatives of all major ethnic groups.  Most lines remained karyotypically normal, but there was a progressive tendency to acquire changes on prolonged culture, commonly affecting chromosomes 1, 12, 17 and 20.  DNA methylation patterns changed but haphazardly with no link to time in culture.  Structural variants (SVs), below the level of standard chromosome banding, determined from the SNP arrays, also appeared sporadically but no common variants related to culture were observed on chromosomes 1, 12 and 17.  However, overlapping SV gains acquired in the chromosome 20q11.21 region during extended culture were identified in over 20% of the cell lines.  Three genes within the minimal shared region, ID1, BCL2L1, and HM13, are expressed in human ES cells, with BCL2L1 a strong candidate for driving this culture adaptation of ES cells.

DESIGN
In order to provide better insight into the frequency and types of genetic changes affecting human ES cells on prolonged passage, the ISCI has undertaken a survey by karyology and high resolution SNP array of one hundred twenty seven independent human ES cell lines, provided by thirty nine laboratories in twenty countries around the world, particularly to identify the common genetic changes that occur during prolonged culture. Here we append data from the SNP genotyping of the genomic DNA samples extracted from the human embryonic stem cells. A group of eleven human iPS cells from three laboratories was also included to provide a pilot comparison of these pluripotent cells derived by reprogramming.

PLATFORM
GPL8882 Illumina HumanOmni1-Quad BeadChip

CITATIONS
22119741

