TITLE
Differential gene expression analysis of MAT1-1 and MAT1-2 strains in Aspergillus oryzae

ORGANISM
Aspergillus oryzae

SUMMARY
The potential for sexual reproduction in Aspergillus oryzae was assessed by investigating the presence and functionality of MAT genes. Previous genome studies had identified a MAT1-1 gene in the RIB40 reference strain. We now report the existence of a complimentary MAT1-2 gene and sequencing of an idiomorph region from A. oryzae strain AO6. This allowed the development of a PCR diagnostic assay, which detected isolates of MAT1-1 and MAT1-2 genotype among 180 strains assayed including industrial tane-koji isolates. Strains used for sake and miso production showed a near 1:1 ratio of MAT1-1 and MAT1-2 mating-types, whereas strains used for soy sauce production showed a significant bias towards the MAT1-2 mating type. MAT1-1 and MAT1-2 isogenic strains were then created by genetic manipulation of the resident idiomorph, and comparisons were made of gene expression by DNA microarray and RT-PCR methodologies under conditions when MAT genes were expressed. 33 genes were found to be up-regulated greater than 10-fold in either the MAT1-1 host or MAT1-2 gene replacement strains relative to each other, showing that both MAT1-1 and MAT1-2 genes functionally regulate gene expression in A. oryzae in a mating-type dependent manner, the first such report from a supposedly asexual fungus. MAT1-1 expression specifically up-regulated an a-pheromone precursor gene, but most genes affected were of unknown function. Results are consistent with a heterothallic breeding system in A. oryzae, and prospects for the discovery of a sexual cycle are discussed.

DESIGN
On a condition that induces mating-type genes descrived in growth protocol section, each cogenic MAT1-1 and MAT1-2 mating-type strains were processed into RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays. In a speculation that genes involved in putative mating process were reguated in mating-type dependent manner, we designed the cogenic strains that differs only in mating-type gene locus to analyze differential gene expression of MAT1-1 vs MAT1-2 strains.

PLATFORM
GPL13996 Affymetrix Aspergillus oryzae custom array

CITATIONS
22327593

