TITLE
Spi-1/PU.1 activates transcription through clustered DNA occupancy in erythroleukemia

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Acute leukemia are characterized by deregulation of transcriptional networks that control the lineage specificity of gene expression. The aberrant overexpression of the Spi-1/PU.1 transcription factor leads to erythroleukemia. To determine how Spi-1 mechanistically influences the transcriptional program, we combined a ChIP-seq analysis with transcriptional profiling in cells from an erythroleukemic mouse model. We show that Spi-1 displays a selective DNA-binding that does not often cause transcriptional modulation. We report that Spi-1 controls transcriptional activation and repression through distinct Spi-1 recruitment to chromatin. We revealed several parameters impacting on Spi-1-mediated transcriptional activation. Gene activation is facilitated by Spi-1 occupancy close to transcriptional starting site of genes devoid of CGIs. Moreover, in those regions Spi-1 acts by binding to multiple motifs tightly clustered and with similar orientation. Finally, in contrast to the myeloid and lymphoid B cells in which Spi-1 exerts a physiological activity, in the erythroleukemic cells, lineage-specific cooperating factors do not play a prevalent role in Spi-1-mediated transcriptional activation. Thus, our work describes a new mechanism of gene activation through clustered site occupancy of Spi-1 particularly relevant in regard to the strong expression of Spi-1 in the erythroleukemic cells.

DESIGN
Chromatin immunoprecipitations of Spi-1, H3K36me3, RNApolII,mouse IgG followed by  sequencing were performed on spleen-derived erythroleukemic cells of spi-1 transgenic mice. In case of Spi-1, reads obtained from the two different mice represent biological replicates and were merged for bioinformatic analysis. Input DNA from each ChIP experiments  have been  pooled and sequenced as one control.

PLATFORM
GPL9318 AB SOLiD System 3.0 (Mus musculus) GPL10279 AB SOLiD System 2.0 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
22790984

