TITLE
Escherichia coli Gene Expression Profiling in Response to the Interaction with Lettuce Rhizosphere

ORGANISM
Escherichia coli str. K-12 substr. MG1655

SUMMARY
Leafy green vegetables, such as lettuce, have been increasingly implicated in outbreaks of foodborne illnesses due to contamination by Escherichia coli O157:H7. While E. coli can survive in soils, colonize plants, and survive on produce, very little is known about the interaction of E. coli with the roots of growing lettuce plants. In these studies a combination of microarray analyses and microbial genetics were used to gain a comprehensive understanding of bacterial genes involved in the colonization and growth of E. coli K12 on lettuce roots using a hydroponic assay system. Here we report that after three days of interaction with lettuce roots, 193 and 131 genes were significantly up-regulated and down-regulated at least 1.5 fold, respectively.  Forty-five out of the 193 up-regulated genes (23%) were involved in protein synthesis and were highly induced. Genes involved in stress response, attachment and biofilm formation were up-regulated in E. coli when they interacted with lettuce roots under conditions of hydroponic growth. In particular crl, a gene regulating the cryptic csgA gene for curli production, was significantly up regulated.  The crl, csgA and fliN mutants had a reduced capacity to attach to roots as determined by bacterial counts and by confocal laser scanning microscopy.  Our microarray data showed that E. coli K12 increased the synthesis of proteins indicated that a dramatic change was induced in the physiology of the microorganism. This study indicates that E. coli K12 can efficiently colonize lettuce roots by using attachment and biofilm modulation genes and can readily adapt to the rhizosphere of lettuce plants. Further studies are needed to better characterize this interaction in pathogenic strains of this species.

DESIGN
Escherichia coli MG1655 strains were grown in the lettuce rhizosphere for three days. Transcriptional profiling of E. coli was compared between cells grown with and without rhizosphere . Three biological replicates of each treatment were prepared, and six microarray slides were used.

PLATFORM
GPL10291 Ocimum Biosolutions E.coli O157 OciChip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

