TITLE
P. falciparum (lab strain 3d7) schizonts untreated control vs P. falciparum (lab strain 3d7) reference RNA pool

ORGANISM
Plasmodium falciparum 3D7

SUMMARY
Calcium is a universal second messenger molecule which plays a significant role in several biological processes. Presence of calcium sensors (calmodulins) and calcium-dependent protein kinases in Plasmodium species suggests an important role of calcium-dependent signaling pathways in the regulation of cellular processes in the malaria parasites. Evidence for the transcriptional response of control Plasmodium falciparum asexual blood stages not treated with the calcium ionophores, A23187 and ionomycin has been presented here.

DESIGN
P. falciparum 3D7 strain was cultured as described by Bozdech Z, Llinas M, Pulliam BL, Wong ED, Zhu J, DeRisi JL: The transcriptome of the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle of Plasmodium falciparum. PLoS Biol 2003, 1(1):E5. Total RNA from each of the time points was isolated and aminoallyl-cDNA was synthesized using reverse transcriptase system (Fermentas). cDNA made from the untreated parasites were labeled with Cy5 (GE-Amersham). A reference pool was made by mixing equal amount of cDNA from the parasites collected at 6 hours interval throughout the 48 hours life cycle and was labeled with Cy3 (GE-Amersham). The samples were then hybridized on a spotted cDNA chip platform comprising 10166 MOEs representing 5363 coding sequences as described in Hu G, Cabrera A, Kono M, Mok S, Chaal BK, Haase S, Engelberg K, Cheemadan S, Spielmann T, Preiser PR, Gilberger TW, Bozdech Z: Transcriptional profiling of growth perturbations of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Nat Biotechnol, 2009. 28(1): p. 91-8. The data was normalized and filtered with the condition, signal intensity > background intensity + 2 SD of background intensity) using NOMAD.

PLATFORM
GPL14831 ZB/SBS-NTU Plasmodium falciparum 10.4K v1.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

