TITLE
Gene expression profiling unravels cancer-related hepatic molecular signatures in steatohepatitis but not in steatosis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Pathogenesis and factors for determining progression of alcoholic and non-alcoholic steatosis to steatohepatitis with risk of further progression to liver cirrhosis and cancer are poorly understood. In the present study, we aimed to identify potential molecular signatures for discrimination of steatohepatitis from steatosis. Global gene expression analysis was applied to unravel differentially expressed genes between steatohepatitis compared to steatosis and control samples. For functional annotation as well as the identification of disease-relevant biological processes of the differentially expressed genes the gene ontology (GO) database was used. Genes down-regulated in steatohepatitis were mainly involved in metabolic processes. Genes up-regulated in steatohepatitis samples were associated with cancer progression and proliferation. Further statistical and pathway analysis lead to the selection of 46 candidate genes which were validated in two sample cohorts by quantitative real-time PCR. In surgical liver resection samples 39 genes and in percutaneous liver biopsies 30 genes were significantly up-regulated in steatohepatitis.  Conclusion: The development of steatohepatitis is characterized by distinct molecular changes.

DESIGN
44 human liver tissue surgical samples (normal n=13; steatosis n=19; steatohepatitis n=12, 8/2 cirrhotic/non-cirrhotic) obtained from patients undergoing liver surgery for HCC, other malignancy/metastatic disease, benign tumors of the liver and organ dedicated to transplantation. Virtually normal control samples in this cohort were taken from patients undergoing surgical resection of liver metastasis, but the surrounding liver tissue used for the molecular analyses was normal, non-tumorous liver tissue without detectable pathological changes. The samples were provided by the Biobank at the Medical University of Graz.

PLATFORM
GPL6884 Illumina HumanWG-6 v3.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
23071592

