TITLE
Gene Bionetworks Involved in Epigenetic Transgenerational Inheritance of Environmentally Altered Sexual Selection:  Role of Epigenetics in Evolutionary Biology

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Sexual selection involves mate preference behavior and is a critical determinant for natural selection and evolutionary biology. Previously an environmental compound (fungicide vinclozolin) was found to promote epigenetic transgenerational inheritance of modified mate selection characteristics in all progeny for three generations after exposure of a gestating female.  The current study investigated gene networks involved in various regions of the brain that correlated with the mate preference behavior altered in F3-Vinclozolin lineage animals.  Statistically significant correlations of differentially expressed gene clusters and modules were identified to associate with specific mate preference behaviors.  This novel systems biology approach identified critical gene networks involved in mate preference behavior and demonstrated the ability of environmental factors to promote epigenetic transgenerational inheritance of this altered evolutionary biology determinant.  Combined observations elucidate the potential molecular control of mate preference behavior and suggests environmental epigenetics can have a role in evolutionary biology. We used Affymetrix Rat Gene 1.0 ST microarrays to determine genes expressed differentially in F3 Vinclozolin lineage male or female rats' 6 brain areas - amygdala (Amy), hippocampus (Hipp), olfactory bulb (OlfB), cingulate cortex (CngCtx), entorhinal cortex (EnCtx), and preoptic area-anterior hypothalamus (POAH) -  due to Vinclozolin treatments of their grand-grandmothers (F0).

DESIGN
For each of 6 brain areas of male or female rats (female: amygdala (F-Amy), cingulate cortex (F-CngCTX), enterorhinal cortex (F-EnCTX), hippocampus (F-Hipp), olfactory bulbs (F-OlfB), and preoptic area-anterior hypothalamus (F-POAH); male: amygdala (M-Amy), cingulate cortex (M-CngCTX), enterorhinal cortex (M-EnCTX), hippocampus (M-Hipp), olfactory bulbs (M-OlfB), and preoptic area-anterior hypothalamus (M-POAH)), RNA samples from 2 treatment groups - F3 Control lineage (Con) or F3 Vinclozolin lineage (Vin) - were compared to each other.  Each of treatment groups contained 4-6 biological replicas for each brain region.  RNA for each replica was isolated from an individual animal in order to compare to individual animal mate preference behavior studied with the same rats before sacrifice. Totally, 132 RNA samples from 24 animals (6 male F3 Control, 6 male F3 Vinclozolin,6 female F3 Control, and 6 female F3 Vinclozolin) were isolated and studied.

