TITLE
Time course expression study in the rat superior olivary complex

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
The superior olivary complex (SOC) is a prominent auditory brainstem center and represents one of the prime model systems to study the development of sensory circuits. We recently performed genome-wide microarray studies to analyze the SOC-related genetic program at postnatal day (P)4 and P25. Here, we extended this analysis by including two additional time points, P0 and P16. Data sets were validated by qRT-PCR. Statistical analysis were performed for the different developmental time points as well as with for differences between the SOC and our previously analyzed brain samples. This analysis revealed that after hearing-onset (P16 and P25), 918 oligos were up-regulated and 810 oligos down-regulated in the SOC compared to the two prehearing stages (P0 and P4). Of the up-regulated oligos, 530 were significantly higher expressed compared to the brain at P25. Concerning neurotransmission, SOC-related elevation was mainly observed for K+ channels, G-proteins, and myelination-related proteins, whereas Ca2+-related proteins showed a decreased expression. In the pre-hearing period, 47 oligos were up-regulated compared to the brain. Several of them were transcription factors, previously associated with other auditory structures, and might ensure coordinated development of peripheral and central auditory structures. Stage-specific comparison identified distinct genetic programs during development: Circuit formation/refinement at P4; myelination and circuit refinement/consolidation at P16; and neuroprotection at P25. Altogether, our study defines the genetic program of postnatal SOC development and provides strong functional candidates for various developmental processes.

DESIGN
The genome wide expression during the postnatal development of the SOC was investigated at two different time points: at postnatal (P) day 0  (before hearing onset) and P16 (after hearing onset). Samples were hybridized onto two color platforms. At least 6 up to nine biological replicates per sample were performed.

