TITLE
The expression of inflammatory genes in endothelial cells is inhibited by N-octanoyl dopamine via modulation of the NFkB pathway

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Dopamine has intrinsic receptor-independent anti-inflammatory properties when used at high concentrations. Since cellular uptake of N-octanoyl dopamine (NOD) is far better than of dopamine, NOD might display anti-inflammatory effects already at relative low concentrations. The present study was conducted to assess the anti-inflammatory potential of NOD and to elucidate how this was mediated. Methods: Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were stimulated with TNF-α in the presence of various NOD concentrations. Affymetrix gene expression profiling (GEP), Western blotting, adhesion of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) to endothelial cells and NFκB activation was studied. Compounds that were structurally related to NOD were used to address the molecular entities within NOD that were required for its anti-inflammatory properties. Results: GEP revealed that NOD down-regulates a wide range of pro-inflammatory mediators. Down-regulation of adhesion molecules was confirmed at the protein level and resulted in a decreased adhesion of PBMC to endothelial cells under static and flow conditions. NOD inhibited NFκB independently of IκBα degradation. Inhibition was associated with an overall decrease in p65 expression and a significant decrease in p65 phosphorylation at Ser276. De novo protein synthesis was not required for inhibition and was not mediated via HO-1. Redox activity and hydrophobicity of NOD seemed to be important entities for its anti-inflammatory properties. Conclusion: Our data demonstrate that NOD has potent anti-inflammatory effects through its action on NFκB. Unlike dopamine, NOD has no adverse effects on blood pressure, making it a promising candidate drug to reduce excessive inflammation occurring under various pathological conditions.

DESIGN
A total of 6 different HUVEC lines were used, n=3 for each group (TNF or TNF+ NOD).

