TITLE
Expression data of liver samples of dex or vehicle treated wildtype and HDAC6- knockout C57Bl/6 mice respectively

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
In the present study, we investigated the importance of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) for glucocorticoid receptor (GR) mediated effects on glucose metabolism, and its potential as a therapeutic target for the prevention of glucocorticoid (GC)-induced diabetes. Dexamethasone (dex)-induced hepatic glucose output and GR translocation were analysed in wildtype (wt) and HDAC6-deficient (HDAC6ko) mice. The effect of the specific HDAC6-inhibitor tubacin was analysed in-vitro. Wt and HDAC6ko mice were subjected to 3 weeks dex treatment before analysis of glucose and insulin tolerance. HDAC6ko mice showed impaired dex-induced hepatic GR translocation. Accordingly, dex induced expression of a large number of hepatic genes was significantly attenuated in mice lacking HDAC6 and by tubacin in-vitro. Glucose output of primary hepatocytes from HDAC6ko mice was diminished. A significant improvement of dex-induced whole-body glucose intolerance as well as insulin resistance in HDAC6ko mice compared to wt littermates was observed. The present study demonstrates that HDAC6 is an essential regulator of hepatic GC stimulated gluconeogenesis and impairment of whole body glucose metabolism through modification of GR nuclear translocation. Selective pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6 may provide a future therapeutic option against the pro-diabetogenic actions of GCs. In this dataset, we include the expression data obtained from isolated RNA of dissected mouse livers using wildtype and HDAC6 deficient animals which were treated over a timespan of 3 weeks with 1mg/kg dexamethasone and vehicle respectively. These data are used to show the hdac6-deficiency mediated attenuation of several dexamethasone induced genes.

DESIGN
12 samples in total were analyzed. 3 samples of different animals of each group (wt vehicle, wt dexamethasone, hdac6ko vehicle and hdac6ko dexamethasone)

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
22210316

