TITLE
Influence of oxygen limitation, absence of the cytochrome bc1 complex and low pH on global gene expression in Gluconobacter oxydans 621H using DNA microarray technology

ORGANISM
Gluconobacter oxydans 621H

SUMMARY
The genome-wide transcriptional responses of the strictly aerobic -proteobacterium Gluconobacter oxydans 621H to oxygen limitation, to the absence of the cytochrome bc1 complex, and to low pH were studied using DNA microarray analyses. Oxygen limitation caused expression changes of 486 genes, representing 20% of the chromosomal genes. Genes with an increased mRNA level included those for terminal oxidases, the cytochrome bc1 complex, transhydrogenase, two alcohol dehydrogenases, heme biosynthesis, PTS proteins, proteins involved in cyclic diGMP synthesis and degradation, two sigma factors, flagella and chemotaxis proteins, several stress proteins, and a putative exporter protein. The downregulated genes comprised those for respiratory dehydrogenases, enzymes of central metabolism, PQQ biosynthesis, outer membrane receptors, Sec proteins, and proteins involved in transcription and translation. A ΔqrcABC mutant of G. oxydans showed a growth defect during cultivation on mannitol at pH 4 under oxygen saturation. Comparison of the transcriptomes of this mutant versus the wild type under these conditions revealed 51 differentially expressed genes. Interestingly, almost all of the 45 genes with increased expression in the ΔqrcABC mutant at pH 4 were also upregulated in the wild type grown at pH 6 under oxygen limitation. These results support an active role of the cytochrome bc1 complex in G. oxydans respiration. The transcriptome comparison of G. oxydans wild type at pH 4 versus pH 6 in mannitol medium under oxygen-saturated conditions uncovered only 72 differentially expressed genes. The 35 upregulated genes included those for cytochrome bd oxidase, major polyol dehydrogenase, iron storage and oxidative stress proteins. Among the 37 downregulated genes were some encoding enzymes dealing with carbon dioxide, such as biotin carboxylase, biotin carboxyl carrier protein, and carboanhydrase. These results give first insights into global transcriptional responses of G. oxydans.

DESIGN
DNA microarray experiments were repeated independently three times for G. oxydans ΔqrcABC versus wild type and G. oxydans grown at pH 4 versus pH 6 and four times for G. oxydans grown at oxygen limitation versus pH oxygen saturation in biological replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL14985 FZ_IBG-1_Gluconobacter oxydans 621H_10K_V1

CITATIONS
22226911

