TITLE
Molecular heterogeneity in acute renal allograft rejection

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The data set contains 67 array (lymphochip cDNA array), published in N Engl J Med 2003 Jul 10;349(2):125-38. PMID: 12853585. TITLE: Molecular heterogeneity in acute renal allograft rejection identified by DNA microarray profiling. BACKGROUND: The causes and clinical course of acute rejection vary, and it is not possible to predict graft outcome reliably on the basis of available clinical, pathological, and genetic markers. We hypothesized that previously unrecognized molecular heterogeneity might underlie some of the variability in the clinical course of acute renal allograft rejection and in its response to treatment.  METHODS: We used DNA microarrays in a systematic study of gene-expression patterns in biopsy samples from normal and dysfunctional renal allografts. A combination of exploratory and supervised bioinformatic methods was used to analyze these profiles.  : We found consistent differences among the gene-expression patterns associated with acute rejection, nephrotoxic effects of drugs, chronic allograft nephropathy, and normal kidneys. The gene-expression patterns associated with acute rejection suggested at least three possible distinct subtypes of acute rejection that, although indistinguishable by light microscopy, were marked by differences in immune activation and cellular proliferation. Since the gene-expression patterns pointed to substantial variation in the composition of immune infiltrates, we used immunohistochemical staining to define these subtypes further. This analysis revealed a striking association between dense CD20+ B-cell infiltrates and both clinical glucocorticoid resistance (P=0.01) and graft loss (P < 0.001).  CONCLUSIONS: Systematic analysis of gene-expression patterns provides a window on the biology and pathogenesis of renal allograft rejection. Biopsy samples from patients with acute rejection that are indistinguishable on conventional histologic analysis reveal extensive differences in gene expression, which are associated with differences in immunologic and cellular features and clinical course. The presence of dense clusters of B cells in a biopsy sample was strongly associated with severe graft rejection, suggesting a pivotal role of infiltrating B cells in acute rejection. A disease state experiment design type is where the state of some disease such as infection, pathology, syndrome, etc is studied. Disease State: normal vs disease Keywords: disease_state_design

DESIGN
Using regression correlation

PLATFORM
GPL271 LC-17 GPL272 LC-20

CITATIONS
12853585

