TITLE
The methylome of Drosophila melanogaster

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster ; Escherichia virus Lambda

SUMMARY
Cytosine methylation  in the genome of Drosophila melanogaster has been elusive and controversial: methylcytosine has been detected at very low levels in early embryos, but the genomic location and function of methylation has not been established. We have mapped cytosine methylation genomewide in Stage 5 Drosophila embryo DNA by combining immuno-enrichment for 5-methylcytosine, bisulfite conversion, and deep sequencing. Unlike methylation patterns observed in other eukaryotic species,  methylation in Drosophila is punctate and highly strand-asymmetrical; we confirmed this by direct PCR amplification and sequencing of bisulfite-converted DNA. Despite the locally asymmetric nature of methylation, large-scale patterns of methylation are symmetric. Methylated regions make up ~1% of the genome, and within these regions methylation of individual cytosines averages 2-10%.  Methylation is concentrated in specific 5-base sequence motifs that are CA- and CT-rich but depleted of guanine. It is depleted from promoters,  coding sequences, and most retrotransposons, and enriched in introns and in certain simple sequence repeats containing the commonly methylated motifs. Comparison with available gene expression data indicates that methylation in a gene is associated with lower expression; the X chromosome, which is subject to gene dosage compensation, is more densely methylated than the autosomes.  This study firmly establishes the presence of cytosine methylation in Drosophila; the temporal overlap of methylation with the maternal-zygotic transition raises the possibility that methylation participates in the transition to zygotic gene expression.

DESIGN
To enrich for rare cytosine methylation in Drosophila at embryonic Stage 5 (2-3 hours post-fertilization),  we enriched sonicated Stage 5 genomic DNA for methylcytosine by immunoprecipitation with antibody to 5-methylcytosine. The immunoprecipitated DNA was then bisulfite converted and Illumina sequenced to obtain direct evidence for the presence of methylation. The presence and extent of DNA methylation was confirmed by Illumina sequencing of bisulfite-converted PCR amplicons.

PLATFORM
GPL9061 Illumina Genome Analyzer II (Drosophila melanogaster) GPL11203 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Drosophila melanogaster) GPL15004 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Enterobacteria phage lambda)

CITATIONS
24558263

