TITLE
Impact of nutrition on genome-wide gene expression during fruiting body development in Neurospora crassa

ORGANISM
Neurospora crassa

SUMMARY
Fungal fruiting body size and form are influenced by the ecology of the species, including diverse environmental stimuli. Accordingly, nutritional resources available to the fungus during development can be vital to successful production of fruiting bodies. To investigate the effect of nutrition, perithecial development of N. crassa was induced on two different media, a sparsely nutritive Synthetic Crossing Medium (SCM) and a natural Carrot Agar (CA). Protoperithecia were collected before crossing, and perithecia were collected at 2, 24, 48, 72, 96, 120, and at full maturity 144 hours after crossing. No differences in fruiting body morphology were observed between the two media at any time point. A circuit of microarray hybridizations comparing cDNA from all neighboring stages was performed. For a majority of differentially expressed genes, expression was higher in SCM than in CA, and expression of core metabolic genes was particularly affected. Effects of nutrition were highest in magnitude before crossing, lowering in magnitude during early perithecial development. Interestingly, metabolic effects of the media were also large in magnitude during late perithecial development, at which stage the lower expression in CA presumably reflected the continued intake of diverse complex initial compounds, diminishing the need for expression of anabolic pathways. However, for genes with key regulatory roles in sexual development, including pheromone precursor ccg-4 and poi2, expression patterns were similar between treatments. When possible, a common nutritional environment is ideal for comparing transcriptional profiles between different fungi.  Nevertheless, the observed consistency of the developmental program across media, despite considerable metabolic differentiation is reassuring. This result facilitates comparative studies that will require different nutritional resources for sexual development in different fungi.

DESIGN
Neurospora crassa mat A FGSC#2489 and mat-a FGSC 4200: Eight perithecial developmental stages, 0hr, 2 hr, 24 hr, 48 hr, 72 hr, 96 hr, 120 hr, and 144 hr were sampled and compared

PLATFORM
GPL10640 Yale University Neurospora crassa 70-mer oligo whole genome transcription array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

