TITLE
Differential Response Following Spinal Cord Injury in EphA4 Knockout

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Mice lacking the developmental axon guidance molecule EphA4 have previously been shown to exhibit extensive axonal regeneration and functional recovery following spinal cord injury.  To assess mechanisms by which EphA4 may modify the response to neural injury, a microarray was performed on spinal cord tissue from mice with spinal cord injury and sham injured controls. RNA was purified from spinal cords of adult EphA4 knockout and wild-type mice four days following lumbar spinal cord hemisection or laminectomy only and was hybridised to Affymetrix All-Exon Array 1.0 GeneChips.  While subsequent analyses indicated that several pathways were altered in EphA4 knockout mice, of particular interest was the attenuated or otherwise altered expression of a number of inflammatory genes, including Arginase 1, expression of which was lower in injured EphA4 knockout compared to wild-type mice. Immunohistological analyses of different cellular components of the immune response were then performed in injured EphA4 knockout and wild-type spinal cords. While numbers of infiltrating CD3+ T cells were low in the hemisection model, a robust CD11b+ macrophage / microglial response was observed post-injury. There was no difference in the overall number or spread of macrophages / activated microglia in injured EphA4 knockout compared to wild-type spinal cords at two, four or fourteen days post-injury, however a lower proportion of Arginase-1 immunoreactive macrophages / activated microglia was observed in EphA4 knockout spinal cords at four days post-injury. Subtle alterations in the neuroinflammatory response in injured EphA4 knockout spinal cords may contribute to the regeneration and recovery observed in these mice following injury.

DESIGN
Comparison was made between gene expression in wild-type and knockout samples both before and after injury. 3 replicates per group.

PLATFORM
GPL6193 [MoEx-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Exon 1.0 ST Array [probe set (exon) version]

CITATIONS
22629434

