TITLE
IL-6R identifies early differentiated human effector memory CD8+ T cells that potently expand and produce IL-2 and IL-13

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
We found a unique subset of effector memory (EM) CD8+ T cells that expressed high levels of IL-6 receptor in human peripheral blood.  These cells which also expressed high levels of IL-7Ra (referred to as IL-6R high IL-7Rahigh cells) had the a distinct gene expression profile and cellular characteristics compared to other EM CD8+ T cells.  IL-6R high IL-7Ra high cells were early differentiated EM CD8+ T cells with decreased expression of T-bet, KLRG1, perforin and granzyme B.  These cells had increased cell proliferation likely secondary to enhanced IL-2 production and high affinity IL-2R expression.  IL-6R high IL-7Ra high EM CD8+ T cells exclusively produced high levels of IL-2, IL-5, IL-9 and IL-13 although IFN-r was produced by this cell subset and other EM CD8+ T cells.  Of interest,  IL-6R high IL-7Ra high EM CD8+ T cells expanded in the peripheral blood of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma where CD8+ T cells, IL-13 and IFN-r are suggested to be involved in the pathogenesis.  Being the early-differentiated EM CD8+ T cells with a potent capacity to proliferate, survive and generate multiple cytokines, IL-6R high IL-7Ra high EM CD8+ T cells may serve as a primary reservoir for effector CD8+ T cells which potently expand and produce cytokines upon immune stimulation.

DESIGN
Duplicate experiments were performed for each condition. In each condition, we independently prepared total RNA using the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) and assessed RNA integrity using Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent)- RINs were close to 10 for all samples. RNA was then amplified and hybridized to the Illumina HumanHT-12 v4.0 BeadChip, according to Illumina standard protocols.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

