TITLE
Focal chromosomal aberrations in high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia reveal hsa-miR-375 and EYA2 as drivers in HPV-mediated transformation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Cervical cancer results from the accumulation of (epi)genetic aberrations following persistent infection with high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV). In order to define genetic aberrations associated with cervical carcinogenesis, chromosomal profiles of high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) were generated. Common aberrations usually encompass large genomic regions and contain numerous genes, hampering identification of actual driver genes. Consequently, direct evidence of chromosomal alterations actively contributing to cervical carcinogenesis has been lacking so far. By analyzing 60 high-grade CIN with high resolution arrayCGH we identified focal chromosomal aberrations that each harbour only one or a few genes.  In total 74 focal aberrations were identified encoding 305 genes. Analysis of genes located within these focal aberrations, using two independent expression microarray datasets, revealed concurrent altered expression in high-grade CIN and/or cervical carcinomas compared to normal cervical samples for 8 genes: ATP13A3, HES1, OPA1, HRASLS, EYA2, ZMYND8, APOBEC2 and NCR2. Gene silencing of EYA2, located within a focal gain at 20q13, significantly reduced viability and migratory capacity of HPV16-transformed keratinocytes. Interestingly, for hsa-miR-375, located within the most frequently identified focal loss at 2q35, a direct correlation between a (focal) loss and significantly reduced expression was found. Down-regulation of hsa-miR-375 expression during cervical carcinogenesis was confirmed in a second independent series of cervical tissues. Moreover, ectopic expression of hsa-miR-375 in 2 cervical carcinoma cell lines reduced cellular viability.   In conclusion, our data provide a proof of concept that chromosomal aberrations are actively contributing to HPV-induced carcinogenesis and identify EYA2 and hsa-mir-375 as oncogene and tumor suppressor gene, respectively.

DESIGN
DNA from microdissected tissues: 60 samples total. 11 high-grade CIN, < 5yr preceding hrHPV infection, 43 high-grade CIN > 5yr preceding hrHPV infection, 6 CIN3 adjacent to SCC

