TITLE
Genome-wide analysis of monocytes and T cells' response to interferon beta

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The research hypothesis was that the unique expression profile of monocytes in response to Interferon-beta (IFN-β) might be masked by the response profile of the more abundant T cells. The analysis of monocytes response may highlight novel IFN-β functions and pathways that have not been recognized previously. The aim of this study was to characterized the IFN-β transcriptional response in monocytes, a small but influential  cell-subset, using gene expression profile and pathway analysis. The expression profiles of purified human monocytes and T cells pulse with IFN-β overnight were compared, and revealed 276 and 42 Differentially Expressed Genes (DEGs) in monocytes and T cells respectively, with only 5 genes common to both sets. Many of the DEGs detected in monocytes were novel with respect to the recognized IFN-β response, and included genes involved in immune-specific activities, communication between cells, regulation of apoptosis, cell migration, and  protein translation. Network and pathway analysis of the T cells response revealed the familiar immune pathways, response to virus pathways, and IFN canonical pathway. In monocytes, however, we detected along with known IFN-β-related pathways, such as cell migration also pathways that had not been previously described in the context of IFN-β response, such as the High-Mobility Group Box-1 (HMGB1) signaling pathway. However, most DEGs in monocytes did not cluster to specific networks or canonical pathways. The monocyte-specific DEGs and pathways described herein are beyond the current knowledge regarding the biology of the IFN-β response and the differential response to IFN-β of monocytes versus T cells described emphasizes the importance of cell-specific studies for elucidating the spectrum of cytokine-mediated immunomodulation.

DESIGN
Monocytes and T lymphocytes were isolated from 3 healthy volunteers. For each sample the expression profile of untreated cells was compared to the profile of IFN-β treated cells, i.e. 4 samples from each donor (2 cell types, with and without treatment), 12 samples total.

PLATFORM
GPL6884 Illumina HumanWG-6 v3.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
23626809

