TITLE
Competitive Action of Butenolides from Plant-Derived Smoke on the Germination Process of Lettuce

ORGANISM
Lactuca sativa

SUMMARY
Sensing environmental cues is essential for plants in order to respond properly to, adapt to and survive changes in the environment and disturbances. Smoke-derived germination active compounds are important cues which provide a strong chemical signal to seeds in the soil seed bank about the available germination niche created by the passage of fire. The germination stimulatory activity can largely be attributed to the presence of the butenolide, 3-methyl-2H-furo[2,3-c]pyran-2-one (karrikinolide; KAR1). More recently, a related fire-borne butenolide, 3,4,5-trimethylfuran-2(5H)-one (inhibenolide A; InhA), was shown to have an inhibitory effect on germination. The aim of this study was to extensively characterize the interaction of these potent smoke-derived compounds in the highly KAR1-sensitive Lactuca sativa cv. ‘Grand Rapids’ achenes.

DESIGN
A time course microarray analysis of KAR1- and InhA-treated achenes was performed using custom-made Agilent microarrays. Early time points for sampling the transcriptome were chosen by taking into account the fact that treatment with KAR1 is irreversible (by leaching with water) after 2 h, and that the KAR1-treated achenes enter an InhA-insensitive stage after 9 h. Therefore, samples were harvested after 2 and 10 h of initial exposure to 0.1 µM KAR1 or 10 µM InhA, and after 24 h, when germinated and non-germinating achenes could be distinguished visually. To assess the divergence between the expression patterns induced by the two compounds, a sample of achenes treated with 0.1 µM KAR1 and 10 µM InhA simultaneously, was harvested after 2 h. At 24 h, samples were collected from germinating and non-germinating achenes separately, and equal amounts of mRNA were pooled. Although this design implies that there is a small chance of losing data, our primary aim at 24 h was to screen for differences between the KAR1- and InhA-induced transcriptome. Achenes germinated in distilled water served as controls and were compared to the experimental samples treated as described above.

PLATFORM
GPL15052 Agilent Lactuca sativa 44K

CITATIONS
23046112

