TITLE
Low Expression of SP1 has a Different Effect on Intestinal-type compared to Diffuse-type Gastric Adenocarcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Specificity protein 1 (SP1) is an essential transcription factor regulating multiple cancer-related genes. Since aberrant expression of SP1 was known to be related to cancer development and progression, we focused on SP1 expression in gastric carcinoma and its correlation with disease outcomes. We discovered a different relationship between SP1 expression and patient survival in intestinal- and diffuse-type gastric cancer. In diffuse-type gastric cancer, patient survival decreased as SP1 expression increased (P < 0.05) in accordance with previously published papers, whereas the lack of SP1 expression in intestinal-type gastric cancer was correlated significantly with poor survival (P < 0.05). When SP1 downregulation was forced in high SP1 expressor intestinal-type gastric cell line MKN28 with siRNA, both migration and invasion were increased but cell proliferation was decreased. In accordance with these results, microarray data in siRNA-transfected MKN28 showed that genes inhibiting migration were downregulated and the expression of genes negatively facilitating proliferation was increased. Both migration and invasion, however, in low SP1 expressor intestinal-type gastric cell line AGS were decreased by forced SP1 expression. In contrast to intestinal-type, in diffuse-type gastric cell line SNU484, high SP1 expressor, both migration and invasion were decreased by siRNA. Contrary to previous studies, which did not reflect differences between the 2 histological types, our results showed that low expression of SP1 is involved in cancer progression and metastasis, and has a different effect on intestinal-type compared to diffuse-type gastric adenocarcinoma.

DESIGN
2 samples for MKN28 cells: si-SP1 against si-control and dyeswap of it upon 72 hour

PLATFORM
GPL4133 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

