TITLE
Transcriptome Analysis in Patients with Progressive Coronary Artery Disease

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The identification of classic risk factors for coronary artery disease unveiled pathophysiologic mechanisms of atherosclerosis. Among them, inflammation as a systemic process measurable in peripheral blood plays a central role in plaque progression. However, other mechanisms of plaque progression remain to be fully understood. Therefore, this study sought to further investigate systemic correlates of plaque progression by global gene expression in peripheral blood. Microrarray gene expression analysis revealed 93 genes differentially expressed between the groups, of which 23 genes have no known function. Among the remaining 70 genes, 10 (14%) were identified to be associated with progenitor and pluripotent cells whereas only 3 genes (4%) had been associated with atherosclerosis. A risk prediction gene signature was developed by a multivariable statistical approach model integrating comprehensive laboratory and clinical patient data. This signature identified plaque progression with 81% sensitivity and 80% specificity (AUC: 0.86) for new patients, as estimated by resampling techniques. Array results were validated by qPCR for the genes ankyrin-2 (ANK2) and glutathione S-transferase theta 1 (GSTT1). In conclusion, patients with pogressive coronary artery disease despite good risk factor control exhibit particular gene expression patterns in peripheral blood. Understanding the functional implications of the observed changes might help to design new approaches to control atherosclerosis progression.

DESIGN
From a large database of 45,727 coronary angiograms, peripheral blood was drawn from two patient groups with good risk factor control, but different clinical evolution: First, 16 patients with significant lesion progression leading to repeated coronary interventions and second, 16 patients with angiographically documented stable courses.

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
23188564

