TITLE
Pten loss and RAS/MAPK activation cooperate to promote EMT and prostate cancer metastasis initiated from stem/progenitor cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
PTEN loss or PI3K/AKT signaling pathway activation correlates with human prostate cancer progression and metastasis. However, in preclinical murine models, deletion of Pten alone fails to mimic the significant metastatic burden that frequently accompanies the end stage of human disease.  To identify additional pathway alterations that cooperate with PTEN loss in prostate cancer progression, we surveyed human prostate cancer tissue microarrays and found that the RAS/MAPK pathway is significantly elevated both in primary and metastatic lesions.  In an attempt to model this event, we crossed conditional activatable K-rasG12D/WT mice with the prostate conditional Pten deletion model we previously generated. Although RAS activation alone cannot initiate prostate cancer development, it significantly accelerated progression caused by PTEN loss, accompanied by epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and macrometastasis with 100% penitence. A novel stem/progenitor subpopulation with mesenchymal characteristics was isolated from the compound mutant prostates, which was highly metastatic upon orthotopic transplantation.  Importantly, inhibition of RAS/MAPK signaling by PD325901, a MEK inhibitor, significantly reduced the metastatic progression initiated from transplanted stem/progenitor cells.  Collectively, these data indicate that activation of RAS/MAPK signaling serves as a potentiating second hit to alteration of the PTEN/PI3K/AKT axis and co-targeting both pathways is highly effective in preventing the development of metastatic prostate cancers.

DESIGN
Murine mutants with prostate specific loss of Pten and K-ras activation (K-rasG12D) under regulation of the probasin promoter developed high grade, invasive prostate cancer.  RNA was extracted from dissected prostate lobes from individual mutants with pathology thought to closely mimic human disease.  Prostate tissue was subject to RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix cDNA microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
22350410

