TITLE
Integrative Epigenomic Analysis Identifies Biomarkers and Therapeutic Targets in Adult B-Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia [methylation profiling]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
We performed DNA methylation (HELP array) and gene expression profiling in 215 samples of adult B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and 12 normal preB samples. Adult B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) is an aggressive disease with < 40% long-term survival. Genetic alterations such as BCR/ABL, E2A/PBX1 and MLL rearrangement (tMLL) define distinct B-ALL subtypes, which are associated with poor clinical outcome. It has been shown that these B-ALL subtypes have distinct expression profiles. However, the role of the epigenome in shaping these expression profiles and how the aberrant epigenetic gene regulation contributes to the biological and clinical features of those ALL subtypes is largely unknown. To address this question, we performed genome-wide DNA methylation and gene expression profiling on a large cohort of 215 well-characterized adult B-ALL specimens from the ECOG E2993 phase III clinical trial and a cohort of normal precursor B (preB) cells from 12 healthy bone marrows. The integrative analysis of these profiles led to the identification of key gene networks deregulated at the epigenetic and transcriptional levels within each subtype. In BCR/ABL, we identified a network centered on IL2RA(CD25), which is itself hypomethylated and overexpressed in most BCR/ABL B-ALL and confers poor clinical outcomes.  In the tMLL subtype, we uncovered aberrant epigenetic and transcriptional activities that include hypomethylation and upregulation of FLT3 and BCL6. After showing that MLL/AF4 fusion protein binds to these genes as well as other hypomethylated and overexpressed genes in tMLL ALL cells, we showed that a specific BCL6 inhibitor, RI-BPI, kills tumor cells in both tMLL ALL cell lines and patient samples. BCL6 inhibition may therefore represent a novel therapeutic strategy for B-ALL patients with MLL translocations.

DESIGN
DNA methylation profiling in 215 samples of adult B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and 12 normal preB samples, using DNA promoter methylation array (HELP array).

PLATFORM
GPL6604 HG17_HELP_Promoter

CITATIONS
23107779 , 23852341

