TITLE
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis ymoA mutant vs. wild type YPIII

ORGANISM
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis YPIII

SUMMARY
Expression of the virulence regulator RovA of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, is controlled by the ncRNAs CsrB and CsrC through CsrA and RovM. In this study, we show that the regulator YmoA of the Hha family of nucleoid-associated proteins controls expression of the counterregulated Csr-type RNAs and the Csr-RovM-RovA signalling cascade through alterations of the CsrC RNA stability. YmoA-mediated stabilization of CsrC depends on CsrA and H-NS, but not on the RNA chaperone Hfq and involves a stabilizing stem-loop structure within the 5’-region of CsrC. YmoA influence on CsrC stability is complex as YmoA was found to control numerous factors known to affect RNA structures and stability. In addition, YmoA controls temperature-dependent early and later stage virulence genes in an opposite manner and coregulates their expression with bacterial stress responses and metabolic functions. Following oral infections in a mouse model, we demonstrate that a ymoA mutant is strongly reduced in its ability to disseminate to the Peyer’s patches, mesenteric lymph nodes, liver and spleen and exhibits a reduced mortality. We propose a model in which YmoA controls switching from a RovA-dependent early colonization phase towards a virulence plasmid (pYV)-dependent infection phase important for host defense and persistence.

DESIGN
For each microarray, 300ng of each Cy3- and Cy5-labelled RNA were mixed, fragmented and hybridized to the microarray at 65°C for 17 hours using the Agilent Hybridization Chamber according to the Agilent instructions. Four replicates were performed. Sequences used for the design of the microarray (Agilent, 8 x 15K format) include three different 60-nt oligonucleotides for all 4172 chromosomal genes (ORFs > 30 codons) of the Y. pseudotuberculosis YPIII genome and six probes for the 92 genes of the virulence plasmid pYV of Y. pseudotuberculosis strain IP32953.

PLATFORM
GPL15095 Agilent-020412 Yersinia pseudotuberculosis YPIII gene expression array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T
