TITLE
Transcripts and metabolites of grape ripening and aroma development

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
Grapes (Vitis species) are economically the most important fruit crop worldwide. However, the complexity of molecular and biochemical events that lead to the onset of ripening in berries as well as how aroma is developed are aspects not fully understood.   In an attempt to identify the common mechanisms associated with the onset of ripening independently of the cultivar, grapes of Portuguese elite cultivars, Trincadeira, Aragonês, and Touriga Nacional, were studied. The mRNA expression profiles corresponding to veraison (EL35) and to mature berries (EL36) were compared. Across the three varieties, 9,8% (2255) probesets corresponding to 1915 unigenes were robustly differentially expressed at EL 36 compared to EL 35. Eleven functional categories were represented in this differential gene set: primary metabolism, “secondary metabolism”, cellular metabolism”, development”, “cellular process”, “diverse functions”, “regulation overview”, response to stimulus, stress”, “signaling”, “transport overview”, and “xenoprotein, transposable element” besides 32.24% genes of “unknown” function. Information on gene expression related to primary and secondary metabolism was verified by RT-qPCR analysis of selected candidate genes at four developmental stages (EL32, EL35, EL36 and EL 38). Gene expression data were integrated with metabolic profiling data from GC-EI-TOF/ MS and headspace GC-EI-MS platforms.   Molecular and metabolic markers of grape ripening related to primary and secondary metabolism were established and revealed a substantial developmental reprogramming of cellular metabolism. Altogether the results provide valuable new information on the main metabolic events leading to grape ripening. Furthermore, we provide first hints about how the development of a cultivar specific aroma is controlled at the transcriptional level.

DESIGN
2 time points in 2008 season. 3 biological replicates. 3 cultivars

PLATFORM
GPL11004 Affymetrix GrapeGen Vitis vinifera Microarray [CDF: GrapeGena520510F]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

