TITLE
Gene expression profiles of spleen, liver and head kidney in turbot (Scophthalmus maximus) along the infection process with Philasterides dicentrarchi using an immune-enriched oligo-microarray

ORGANISM
Scophthalmus maximus

SUMMARY
We evaluated the expression profiles of turbot in spleen, liver and head kidney across five temporal points of the Philasterides dicentrarchi infection process using an 8x15K Agilent oligo-microarray. The microarray included 2,176 different 5-fold replicated gene probes designed from a turbot 3’ sequenced EST database. We were able to identify 221 differentially expressed (DE) genes (8.1% of the whole microarray), 113 in spleen, 83 in liver and 90 in head kidney, in at least one of the 5 temporal points sampled for each organ. Most of these genes could be annotated (83.0%) and functionally categorized using GO terms (69.1%) after the additional sequencing of DE genes from the 5’ end. Many DE genes were related to innate and acquired immune functions. A high proportion of DE genes were organ-specific (70.6%), although their associated GO functions showed notable similarities in the three organs. The most striking difference in functional distribution was observed between the up- and down-regulated gene groups. Up-regulated genes were mostly associated to immune functions, while down-regulated ones mainly involved metabolism-related genes. Genetic response appeared clustered in a few groups of genes with similar expression profiles along the temporal series. The information obtained will aid to understand the turbot immune response and will specifically be valuable to develop strategies of defense to P. dicentrarchi to achieve more resistant broodstocks for turbot industry.

DESIGN
We were interested in analyzing the response of turbot as species to P. dicentrarchi in three of the main immune organs (spleen, liver and head kidney) along a temporal series representing the main episodes of infection (1d, 3d, 7d, 15d, 25d). Accordingly, individual samples were pooled at each sampling point to average interindividual variation. A single control point (time 0; non-injected) was used since a very slight effect of injection on gene expression was previously reported in these three organs in turbot. Five fish were sacrificed on day 0 to be used as the unique control in the experiment and one hundred fifty were challenged with a highly virulent strain of P. dicentrarchi as previously described (Paramá et al., 2003).  Groups of five fish were sacrificed at 1d, 3d, 7d, 15d and 25d post-challenging. Equal amounts of spleen, liver and head kidney were sampled from each fish, pooled per organ at each sampling point and immediately stored in liquid nitrogen.

