TITLE
Human mesenchymal stem cell-derived matrices for enhanced osteoregeneration

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens ; Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The methodology for the repair of critical-sized or non-union bone lesions has unpredictable efficacy due in part to our incomplete knowledge of bone repair and the biocompatibility of bone substitutes. Although human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) differentiate into osteoblasts, which promote bone growth, their ability to repair bone has been unpredictable. We hypothesized that given the multi-stage process of osteogenesis, hMSC-mediated repair might be maximal at a specific time-point of healing. Utilizing a mouse model of calvarial healing, we demonstrate that the osteo-repair capacity of hMSCs can be substantially augmented by treatment with an inhibitor of peroxisome-proliferator-activated-receptor-γ, but efficacy is confined to the rapid osteogenic phase. Upon entry into the bone-remodeling phase, hMSC retention signals are lost, resulting in truncation of healing. To solve this limitation, we prepared a scaffold consisting of hMSC-derived extracellular matrix (ECM) containing the necessary biomolecules for extended site-specific hMSC retention. When inhibitor-treated hMSCs were co-administered with ECM, they remained at the injury well into the remodeling phase of healing, which resulted in reproducible and complete repair of critical-sized defects in 3 weeks. These data suggest that hMSC-derived ECM and inhibitor-treated hMSCs could be employed at optimal times to substantially and reproducibly improve bone repair.

DESIGN
To gain insight into the superior healing potential of GW-hMSCs and also what might be accounting for their extended engraftment, microarray analyses on the RNA extracted from the calvarial tissue recovered after days 5 and 14 were performed. Equal amounts of total RNA from 4 animals per group and time point were pooled and animals receiving control (DMSO) or peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma inhibitor GW9662-treated hMSCs were compared with the assumption that murine cross-hybridization would be constant throughout the samples and thus be subtracted from the analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

