TITLE
MicroRNA expression in lineage specific hematopoiesis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
MicroRNA plays a critical role in a wide variety of biological processes and regulate genes associated with different biological processes such as development, proliferation, apoptosis, stress response, and tumourigenesis. Profiling miRNA expression during differentiation of embryonic stem cells will help to understand the regulation pathway of differentiation, which in turn may elucidate disease mechanisms. In human hematopoiesis that requires a tight control of gene expression, lineage-specific transcription factors have long been known to act as key regulators of gene expression in multiple cell-fate decisions that govern cell differentiation. Given the important role of miRNAs in development and differentiation, it would be beneficial to elucidate the role of miRNAs in hematopoiesis for identifying novel drug targets.  We undertook the current study of examining the expression of miRNA expression in CD34+ before and after differentiation into erythropoietic, granulopoietic and megakaryocytic  cells using Affymetrix V 2.0 miRNA genechips. We identified 388 probesets representing 140 miRNAs, snoRNAs and stemloop RNAs to be significantly altered during lineage specific differentiation of CD34+ cells.  Of these differentially expressed miRNAs with functional roles in cellular growth and proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis, 16 downregulated miRNAs were found to overlap between the E, M and G groups, hsa-miR150 was significantly downregulated and hsa-miR 210 and hsa-miR-1260b were found to be uniquely upregulated during granulopoiesis while hsa-miR486 was found to be upregulated during erythropoiesis and downregulated in megakaryopoiesis. Megakaryopoitic differentiation specifically resulted in significant down regulation of many miRNAs such as mir -150, mir -155, mir-15, mir-181, mir-221 that seem to play critical roles in the regulation of  B and T cell differentiation . An integrated analysis of the differentially expressed miRNA and mRNA identified specific gene targets that are regulated by the significantly altered micro RNAs during lineage specific hematopoiesis. We believe that this study would enhance our understanding of the role of miRNA in lineage specific gene expression.

DESIGN
CD34+ cells were compared to differentiated Erythropoitic, granulopoietic and megakaryopoiteic groups to identify differentially expressed microRNAs Human hematopoietic progenitor cells

PLATFORM
GPL14613 [miRNA-2] Affymetrix Multispecies miRNA-2 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

