TITLE
Expression data from a model of renal deceased by cardiac death (DCD) donation in rat

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
In DCD organ donation one of the significant problems for the organ is the inflammatory response due to ischaemiua reperfusion injury caused by warm ischaemia prior to retrieval followed by warm reoxygenation upon transplantation. We developed a model where a DCD kidney was retrieved and stoired overnight then the organ was surgically attached to the femoral artery of a recipient rat and blood flow restored for up to six hours to simulate early ischaemia reperfusion injury (IRI). The recipient rats consisted of a control group compared to groups recieveing either low molecular weight heparin or an anti-inflammatory peptide to assess their activity in ameliorating IRI. We used equimolar pooled RNA samples from each group to perform an exploratory microarray experiment.

DESIGN
Donor kidneys were harvested and static cold stored in University of Wisconsin (UW) Solution overnight before being surgically connected to the femoral artery of a recipient rat to simulate transplantation and whole blood ischaemia reperfusion injury. The model was then used to test the anti-inflammatory properties of the glycosaminoglycan heparin and a peptide based upon the heparin binding domain of the pro-inflammatory chemokine CCL5. The treatments were delivered as a bolus in normal saline and control recipients were given normal saline as a control. The kidneys underwent perfusion by normal blood flow for a period of up to six hours after which the recipient was euthanased and the donor kidney was removed. Half of the donor kidney was used to extract RNA and half taken for immunohistochemical analysis. The RNA was extracted using the Tri reagent and stored in RNA Later. The qualitative best three RNAs from each group were quantified by fluorimetry and mixed in an equimolar manner and used for microarray analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL1355 [Rat230_2] Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

