TITLE
Affymetrix Cytogenetics array data for a study of D45-deficiency resulting from uniparental disomy: a novel cause of SCID

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Analysis of the molecular etiologies of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) has led to important insights into the control of immune cell development. Most cases of SCID result from either X-linked or autosomal recessive inheritance of mutations in a known causative gene. However, in some cases, the molecular etiology remains unclear.  To identify the cause of SCID in a patient known to lack the protein tyrosine phosphatase CD45, we utilized single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) Cytogenetics arrays; The patient’s mother was heterozygous for an inactivating mutation in CD45, while the paternal alleles exhibited no detectable mutations. The patient exhibited a single CD45 mutation identical to the maternal allele.  Patient SNP array analysis revealed no change in copy number but loss of heterozygosity for the entire length of chromosome 1 (Chr1), indicating that disease was caused by uniparental disomy (UPD) with isodisomy of the entire maternal Chr1 bearing the mutant CD45 allele.  Non-lymphoid blood cells and other mesoderm and ectoderm-derived tissues retained UPD of the entire maternal Chr1 in this patient who had undergone successful bone marrow transplantation. These findings represent the first reported case of SCID caused by UPD and suggest UPD should be considered in SCID and other recessive disorders, especially when the patient appears homozygous for an abnormal gene found in only one parent.  Evaluation for alterations in other genes affected by UPD should also be considered in such cases.

DESIGN
Affymetrix SNP Cytogenetics arrays were performed according to the manufacturer's directions on DNA extracted from cryopreserved sorted PMBC and buccal samples. Copy number and allele analysis of Affymetrix Cytogenetics arrays was performed for the patient's and his parent's samples.

PLATFORM
GPL11157 [Cytogenetics_Array] Affymetrix Cytogenetics Whole-Genome 2.7M Array

CITATIONS
22689986

