TITLE
Analysis of striatal transcriptome in transgenic mice overexpressing human wild-type alpha-synuclein

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Alpha synuclein (SNCA) has been linked to neurodegenerative diseases (synucleinopathies) that include Parkinson’s disease (PD). Although the primary neurodegeneration in PD involves nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons, more extensive yet regionally selective neurodegeneration is observed in other synucleinopathies.  Furthermore, SNCA is ubiquitously expressed in neurons and numerous neuronal systems are dysfunctional in PD. Therefore it is of interest to understand how overexpression of SNCA affects neuronal function in regions not directly targeted for neurodegeneration in PD. To gain a better understanding of the consequences of excessive SNCA expression on basal ganglia function, we performed transcriptome analysis of striatal tissue from male Thy1-aSyn-mice and wt littermates. The present study investigated the consequences of SNCA overexpression on cellular processes and functions in the striatum of mice overexpressing wild-type, human SNCA under the Thy1 promoter (Thy1-aSyn mice) by transcriptome analysis.  The analysis revealed alterations in multiple biological processes in the striatum of Thy1-aSyn mice, including synaptic plasticity, signaling, transcription, apoptosis, and neurogenesis. The present study investigated the consequences of SNCA overexpression on cellular processes and functions in the striatum of mice overexpressing wild-type, human SNCA under the Thy1 promoter (Thy1-aSyn mice) by transcriptome analysis.  The analysis revealed alterations in multiple biological processes in the striatum of Thy1-aSyn mice, including synaptic plasticity, signaling, transcription, apoptosis, and neurogenesis.

DESIGN
Animal care was conducted in accordance with the U. S. Public Health Service Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and procedures were approved by the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), I.A.C.U. Committee.  Transgenic (tg) mice overexpressing human wt SNCA under the Thy-1 promoter (Thy1-aSyn) created previously in a mixed C57BL/6-DBA background were kept in this background by breeding mutant females with wt males.  Only male mice were used in the study. The genotype of all tg and wt mice was verified by PCR analysis of tail DNA. Animals were maintained on a 12 hr light/dark cycle with free access to water and food. Six-month old male Thy1-aSyn and wt littermates were sacrificed by decapitation.  For microarray analysis, whole striata from each hemisphere were immediately dissected and pooled for each brain. Tissue was permeated in RNAlater (Qiagen, Valencia, CA), frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at - 80º C until used for RNA preparation. For PCR verification of transcriptional changes and for protein extracts preparation, brains from 5 male Thy1-aSyn and 5 wt littermates were obtained as above but then the brains were placed in a metal brain mold with grooves to ensure reproducible cutting of thick brain slices. A first coronal cut was made with a razor blade to remove the frontal part of the brain (at bregma + 1mm, at the anterior level of striatum). The following 1mm coronal slice (including the striatum but no globus pallidus) was used to dissect out striatal tissue.  A horizontal cut was made through the anterior commissures to exclude the nucleus accumbens. One cube of striatum was dissected out from each hemisphere, taking care not to include any corpus callosum, choroid plexus, or subventricular zone.  Samples were stored at -80º C until further processing.  Total RNA was extracted from striata of Thy1-aSyn and wt littermates (all males) with Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), followed by a clean-up step with RNeasy columns (Qiagen) and RNA integrity check using a Bioanalyzer  (Agilent Tech., Foster city, CA). RNA samples were pooled, one pool representing the six control wt mice and the other representing the six SNCA overexpressing animals.  After synthesis, using Superscript (Invitrogen) and labeling using the ENZO labeling kit (Affymetrix Inc., Santa Clara, CA), cRNA probes were hybridized to mouse MOE-430A GeneChip arrays (Affymetrix) following the manufacturer’s protocol at the UCLA microarray core facility.  Significant differential gene expression between pooled tg and wt samples was ascertained by estimation of signal log2 ratios (or fold changes in expression values), after quality control checks, data normalization and estimating expression values using the Affymetrix Microarray Suite 5.0 Software (MAS 5.0).  After pairwise comparisons and filtering of this gene list using the following criteria: change p-value < 0.005 for induce genes, change p-value > 0.995 for decreased genes, signal log2 ratio > 0.6 ( > 1.52 fold change), excluding probes called absent in both groups, a list of differentially expressed genes was generated. We used various statistical softwares and databases to ascertain pathways affected by overexpression of SNCA that are associated with overrepresented genes in this gene list, including, the functional annotation tools accessible through DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery, http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov )

PLATFORM
GPL339 [MOE430A] Affymetrix Mouse Expression 430A Array

CITATIONS
22165993

