TITLE
Impact of miRNAs modulation on regulatory networks and pathways involved in colon cancer and metastasis development

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Originally linked with development and differentiation, the role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in  many important biological processes has emerged and dysregulation of miRNA expression has  been connected with cancer pathogenesis. The association between abnormal expression levels of miRNAs and colon cancer has been mainly demonstrated in primary tumors; more recently, non-overlapping sets of oncomirs, tumour suppressor miRNAs and metastamirs have been associated  with distinct stages of colo-rectal cancer (CRC) progression. In an attempt to identify changes in both miRNA and gene expression levels along the colon mucosa - primary tumor - liver metastasis-  sequence and to classify miRNAs into distinct functional networks according to the expression of  their anti-correlated and differentially expressed target genes, we analyzed a large set of sample-matched miRNA and mRNA expression profiles, including the complete non tumor tissue, primary  carcinoma and liver metastasis sequence from 8 patients. Our study shows that the largest changes  in miRNA and gene expression levels occur in normal mucosa to tumor transition and are almost  stably maintained in the subsequent tumor to metastasis transition. Only a few miRNAs were  differentially expressed between liver metastasis and primary carcinoma; however, miRNA  expression profiles classified better primary tumors and metastases compared to mRNA profiles. By  integration of miRNAs and target genes expression data, we were able to infer regulatory networks  modulated by miRNAs during colorectal tumorigenesis and metastatic process, and associate them  to the affected biological pathways. In particular, we identified a combination of interconnected  miRNAs, up- or down-regulated during tumorigenesis, which are organized into distinct sub-networks, each of which includes several regulatory relationships with differentially expressed  genes. Among them, the relationship between miR-182, up-regulated in colon cancer, and the anti-correlated ENTPD5 gene was identified for the first time and confirmed in an independent set of samples.

DESIGN
We determined miRNA expression profile for 78 samples comprising 23 normal adjacent mucosa (N), 31 primitive colorectal cancer (T) and 24 liver metastases (M), obtained from 45 patients who underwent surgery at University of Padova (Surgery Branch, Department of Oncological and Surgical Sciences) between March 1994 and September 2008. This dataset included 24 samples belonging to 8 patients with matched samples (N, T and M) from the same patients. We also examined the expression profiles for 80 samples, comprising 23 N, 30 T, 27 M, and including 27 per-patient matched samples from 9 patients. Considering both miRNAs and genes expression experiments, we obtained a set of 77 samples (23N, 30T, 24M) with matched miRNAs and genes expression data from the same biological sample, to reconstruct post-transcriptional regulatory networks.

PLATFORM
GPL8786 [miRNA-1] Affymetrix Multispecies miRNA-1 Array GPL15236 [HuEx-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0 ST Array [CDF: Brainarray Version 12.1.0]

CITATIONS
23987127

