TITLE
Environmentally Induced Epigenetic Transgenerational Inheritance of Somatic Transcriptomes

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Environmentally induced epigenetic transgenerational inheritance of adult onset disease involves a variety of phenotypic changes suggesting a general alteration in genome activity.   Investigation of eleven different tissue transcriptomes in male and female F3 generation vinclozolin versus control lineage rats demonstrated all tissues examined had unique transgenerational transcriptomes.  Common cellular pathways and processes were identified among the tissues.  A bionetwork analysis identified gene modules with coordinated gene expression and each had unique gene networks regulating tissue specific gene expression and function.  A large number of statistically significant over-represented clusters of differentially expressed genes were identified and termed “Epigenetic Control Regions”.  Combined observations demonstrate that all tissues derived from the epigenetically altered germ line develop transgenerational transcriptomes unique to the tissue, but common epigenetic control regions in the genome appear to in part coordinately regulate these tissue specific transcriptomes.  This systems biology approach provides insight into the molecular mechanisms involved in the epigenetic transgenerational inheritance of a variety of adult onset disease phenotypes. We used microarrays to determine genes expressed differentially in rats 11 male or female smatic tissues -male heart, kidney, liver, testis, prostate, seminal vesicles; female heart, kidney, liver, ovary, uterus  -  due to Vinclozolin treatments of their grand-grandmothers.

DESIGN
For each of 11 male or female smatic tissues, RNA samples from 2 treatment groups - control (Con) and vinclozolin (Vin) - were compared to each other.  Each treatment groups contained 3 biological replica. RNA for each replica was pooled from 2 individual animals.

PLATFORM
GPL6247 [RaGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Rat Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
23034163

