TITLE
Transcriptional reprogramming by root knot and migratory nematode infection in rice

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa Japonica Group

SUMMARY
In this study  a comparison was made between the local transcriptional changes at two time points upon root knot (Meloidogyne graminicola) and migratory nematode (Hirschmanniella oryzae) infection in rice. Using mRNA-Seq we have characterized specific and general responses of the root challenged with these endoparastic root nematodes with very different modes of action. Root knot nematodes induce major developmental reprogramming of the root tip, where they force the cortical cells to form multinucleate giant cells, resulting in gall-development. Our results show that root knot nematodes force the plant to produce and transfer nutrients, like sugars and amino acids, to this tissue. Migratory nematodes, on the other hand, induce the expression of proteins involved in plant death and oxidative stress, and obstruct the normal metabolic activity of the root. While migratory nematode infection also causes upregulation of biotic stress-related genes early in the infection, the root knot nematodes seem to actively suppress the local defence  of the plant root. This is exemplified by a downregulation of genes involved in the salicylic acid and ethylene pathways. Interestingly, hormone pathways usually involved in plant development, were strongly induced (auxin and gibberellin) or repressed (cytokinin) in the galls. In addition, thousands of novel transcriptionally active regions as well as highly expressed nematode transcripts were detected in the infected root tissues. These results uncover previously unrecognized nematode-specific expression profiles and provide an interesting starting point to study the physiological function of many yet unannotated transcripts potentially targeted by these nematodes.

DESIGN
2 or 3 biological replicates of nematode infected roots and root tips and their respective controls were sampled at two time points (1 biological replicate contains pooled tissue from 6 plants)

PLATFORM
GPL13808 Illumina Genome Analyzer II (Oryza sativa Japonica Group)

CITATIONS
22985291

