TITLE
Suppression and Activation of the Malignant Phenotype by Extracellular Matrix in Xenograft Models of Bladder Cancer: A Model for Tumor Cell Dormancy

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
A major problem in cancer research is the lack of a tractable model for delayed metastasis. Herein we show that cancer cells suppressed by SISgel, a gel-forming normal ECM material derived from Small Intestine Submucosa (SIS), in flank xenografts show properties of suppression and re-activation that are very similar to normal delayed metastasis and suggest these suppressed cells can serve as a novel model for developing therapeutics to target micrometastases or suppressed cancer cells. Co-injection with SISgel suppressed the malignant phenotype of highly invasive J82 bladder cancer cells and highly metastatic JB-V bladder cancer cells in nude mouse flank xenografts. Cells could remain viable up to 120 days without forming tumors and appeared much more highly differentiated and less atypical than tumors from cells co-injected with Matrigel. In 40% of SISgel xenografts, growth resumed in the malignant phenotype after a period of suppression or dormancy for at least 30 days and was more likely with implantation of 3 million or more cells. Ordinary Type I collagen did not suppress malignant growth, and tumors developed about as well with collagen as with Matrigel. A clear signal in gene expression over different cell lines was not seen by transcriptome microarray analysis, but in contrast, Reverse Phase Protein Analysis of 250 proteins across 4 cell lines identified Integrin Linked Kinase (ILK) signaling that was functionally confirmed by an ILK inhibitor. We suggest that cancer cells suppressed on SISgel could serve as a model for dormancy and re-awakening to allow for the identification of therapeutic targets for treating micrometastases.

DESIGN
Earlier we demonstrated that the phenotype of bladder cancer cells was radically different in 3-dimensional organotypic culture when grown on a normal extracellular matrix preparation (SISgel) as compared to that observed on a cancer-modulated permissive extracellular matrix preparation (Matrigel). SISgel is a gel-forming material derived from acellular small intestine submucosa, whereas Matrigel is a basement membrane preparation obtained from a mouse sarcoma.  On Matrigel the bladder cancer cells recapitulated the phenotype reported for the original tumor; in sharp contrast, most of the malignant properties were lost when the cells were grown on SISgel.  Cell lines derived from papillomas formed a layered structure reminiscent of normal urothelium, whereas cell lines derived from higher grade tumors formed a noninvasive layer of cells. These findings suggested that growth of cancer cells on normal ECM could provide a model to investigate the phenomenon of suppression of malignancy by normal ECM in metastasis and recurrence.     In this study we explored whether the phenotypic suppression seen in organotypic culture of bladder cancer cells on SISgel also is observed in vivo. Positive findings support the use of SISgel as a model for investigations of the dormant or suppressed tumor cell phenotype and of mechanisms by which the normal ECM exerts an inhibitory influence on tumorigenesis and metastasis. The findings strongly suggest that interactions of cancer cells with normal ECM play an important role in recurrence and metastasis and further suggest that targeting suppressed cells could represent a heretofore unexploited point of vulnerability in cancer therapy.

PLATFORM
GPL6244 [HuGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
23717563

