TITLE
Gene expression analysis in microdissected shoot meristems of Brassica napus microspore-derived embryos with altered levels of SHOOTMERISTEMLESS

ORGANISM
Brassica napus

SUMMARY
SHOOTMERISTEMLESS (STM) is a well characterized key regulator of the shoot apical meristem (SAM) activity in diverse plant species.  We used a transgenic approach to investigate how the altered expression of Brassica napus (Bn) STM affects the morphology and behavior of microspore-derived embryos (MDEs).  Down-regulation of BnSTM repressed the formation of the SAM and reduced the number of MDEs able to regenerate viable plants at germination.  This was in contrast to embryos over-expressing BnSTM which displayed enlarged SAMs with an improved regeneration frequency.  To further investigate the regulatory mechanisms underpinning these different responses, global changes in transcript levels were analysed in laser micro dissected SAMs of the transformed MDEs. The induction of BnSTM up-regulated the expression of many transcription factors (TFs) some of which directly involved in the formation of the SAM, i.e. CUPSHAPED COTYLEDON1 and WUSCHEL, and regulatory components ofthe antioxidant response, hormone signalling, and cell wall synthesis and modification. Opposite expression patterns for some of these genes were observed in the SAMs of MDEs down-regulating BnSTM.  These data were interpreted in relation to the ability of BnSTM to modulate the size and functionality of the SAM.  Structural and expression studies were further conducted to confirm the role of BnSTM in mediating the regulatory network of cell wall and lignin synthesis. Besides lowering the transcript levels of early components of cell wall and lignin biosynthetic pathways in the SAM, BnSTM had a remarkable repressing effect on the expression of PHENYLALANINE AMMONIA LYASE2, CINNAMATE 4-4HYDROXYLASE, andCINNAMYL ALCOHOL DEHYDROGENASE.  Since lignin formation is a feature of irreversible cell differentiation, these results suggest that one way in which BnSTM promotes indeterminate cell fate may be by preventing the expression of components of biochemical pathways involved in the accumulation of lignin in the meristematic cells.  Overall these studies provide evidence for a novel function of BnSTM in enhancing the quality of in vitro produced meristems, and propose that this gene can be used as a potential target to improve regeneration of cultured embryos.

DESIGN
2 mutants and 1 wild type

PLATFORM
GPL15260 CombiMatrix 90K Brassica oligonucleotide array (v1.1)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

