TITLE
Long RNA-seq from ENCODE/Cold Spring Harbor Lab

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
This data was generated by ENCODE. If you have questions about the data, contact the submitting laboratory directly (Carrie Davis mailto:davisc@cshl.edu (experimental), Roderic Guigo mailto:rguigo@imim.es and lab (data processing) and Tom Gingeras mailto:gingeras@cshl.edu (primary investigator)). If you have questions about the Genome Browser track associated with this data, contact ENCODE ( mailto:genome@soe.ucsc.edu ). These tracks were generated by the ENCODE Consortia. They contain information about mouse RNAs > 200 nucleotides in length obtained as short reads off the Illumina platform. Data are available from biological replicates. For data usage terms and conditions, please refer to http://www.genome.gov/27528022 and http://www.genome.gov/Pages/Research/ENCODE/ENCODEDataReleasePolicyFinal2008.pdf

DESIGN
Tissue Samples: Individual tissues were harvested from mouse strain C57BL/6NJ at different timepoints according to ENCODE cell culture protocols. Whenever possible biological replicates from litermates. Library Preparation: The published cDNA sequencing protocol was used. This protocol generates directional libraries and reports the transcripts' strand of origin. Exogenous RNA spike-ins were added to each endogenous RNA isolate and carried through library construction and sequencing. The spike-in sequence and the concentrations are available for download in the supplemental directory. Sequencing and Mapping: The libraries were sequenced on the Illumina platform (either GAIIx or Hi-Seq) in mate-pair fashion (either pair-end 76 or pair-end 101) to an average depth of 100 million mate-pairs. The data were mapped against hg19 using Spliced Transcript Alignment and Reconstruction (STAR) written by Alex Dobin (CSHL). More information about STAR, including the parameters used for these data, is available from the Gingeras lab. Verification: FPKM (fragments per kilobase of exon per million fragments mapped) values were calculated for annotated exons and Spearman correlation coefficients were computed. In general, Rho values are > .90 between biological replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL9250 Illumina Genome Analyzer II (Mus musculus) GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
25413365 , 25582907

