TITLE
Virus-misplaced host protein activates innate immunity

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Discrimination between self vs. non-self and adequate response to infection and tissue damage are fundamental functions of the immune system. The rapid and global spread of known and emerging viruses is a testament that the timely detection of viral pathogens that reproduce within host cells, presents a formidable challenge to the immune system. To gain access to a proper reproductive niche, many pathogens travel via the host vasculature and therefore become exposed to humoral factors of the innate immune system. Although a cascade of coagulation factors plays a fundamental role in host defense for “living fossils” such as horseshoe crabs (Xiphosurida spp), the role of the coagulation system in activation of innate responses to pathogens in higher organisms remains unclear. When human type C adenovirus (HAdv) enters the circulation, 240 copies of coagulation factor X (FX) bind to the virus particle with picomolar affinity. Here, using molecular dynamics flexible fitting (MDFF) and high resolution cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM), we defined the interface between the HAdv5 hexon protein and FX at pseudo-atomic level. Based on this structural data, we introduced a single amino acid substitution, T424A, in the hexon that completely abrogated FX interaction with the virus. In vivo genome-wide transcriptional profiling revealed that FX-binding-ablated virus failed to activate a distinct network of the early response genes, whose expression depends on transcription factor NFKB1. Deconvolution of the signaling network responsible for early gene activation showed that the FX-HAdv complex triggers MyD88/TRIF/TRAF6 signaling upon activation of toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) that serves as a principal sensor of FX-virus complex in vivo. Our study implicates host factor “decoration” of the virus as a mechanism to trigger innate immune sensor that respond to a misplacement of coagulation FX from the blood into intracellular macrophage compartments upon virus entry into the cell. Our results further the mounting evidence of evolutionary conservation between the coagulation system and innate immunity.

DESIGN
Two strains of mice, C57BL/6, and Il1r1-/- deficient. Mice were challenged with wild type HAdv5 or HAdv5-based vectors.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
23019612

