TITLE
Gene expression data from human lymphocytes

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Both genetic and environmental factors are implicated in Type 1 Diabetes (T1D). Since environmental factors can trigger epigenetic changes, we hypothesized that variations in  histone posttranslational modifications (PTMs) at the promoter/enhancer regions of T1D susceptible genes may be associated with T1D. We therefore evaluated histone PTM variations at known T1D susceptible genes in blood cells from T1D patients versus healthy non-diabetic controls, and explored their connections to T1D. We used the chromatin-immunoprecipitation-linked-to-microarray approach to profile key histone PTMs, including H3-lysine-4 trimethylation (H3K4me3), H3K27me3, H3K9me3, H3K9 acetylation (H3K9Ac) and H4K16Ac at genes within the T1D susceptible loci in lymphocytes, and H3K4me3, H3K9me2, H3K9Ac and H4K16Ac at the IDDM1 region in monocytes of T1D patients and healthy controls separately. We screened for potential variations in histone PTMs using computational methods to compare datasets from T1D and controls. Interestingly, we observed marked variations in H3K9Ac levels at the upstream regions of HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQB1 within the IDDM1 locus in T1D monocytes relative to controls. Additional experiments with THP-1 monocytes demonstrated increased expression of HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQB1 in response to interferon- and TNF-treatment that were accompanied by changes in H3K9Ac at the same promoter regions as that seen in the patient monocytes. These results suggest that the H3K9Ac status of HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQB1, two genes highly associated with T1D, may be relevant to their regulation and transcriptional response towards external stimuli. Thus, the promoter/enhancer architecture and chromatin status of key susceptible loci could be important determinants in their functional association to T1D susceptibility.

DESIGN
We used microarrays to obtain global gene expression data in human lymphocytes. Human lymphocytes were prepared from four healthy non-diabetic volunteers. Total RNAs were extracted using Qiagen RNeasy mini kits following the manufacturer's instructions. Biotinylated single-strand cDNA was generated and subjected to expression profiling with Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST arrays, followed by data analyses and conversion into expression measurements using Affymetrix's Expression Console v1.1.1. The data set is used for integration with ChIP array data.

PLATFORM
GPL6244 [HuGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
22431725

