TITLE
Platelet-derived growth factor-alpha (PDGF-α) stimulates intestinal epithelial cell turnover after massive small bowel resection in a rat

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Numerous cytokines have been shown to affect epithelial cell differentiation and proliferation through epithelial-mesenchymal interaction. Growing evidence suggests that platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) signaling is an important mediator of these interactions. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of PDGF-α on enterocyte turnover in a rat model of short bowel syndrome (SBS). Male rats were divided into four groups: Sham rats underwent bowel transection, Sham-PDGF-α rats underwent bowel transection and were treated with PDGF-α, SBS rats underwent a 75% bowel resection, and SBS-PDGF-α rats underwent bowel resection and were treated with PDGF-α. Parameters of intestinal adaptation, enterocyte proliferation and apoptosis were determined at sacrifice. Illumina's Digital Gene Expression (DGE) analysis was used to determine PDGF-related gene expression profiling. PDGF-α and PDGF-α receptor (PDGFR-α) expression was determined using Real Time PCR. Western blotting was used to determine p-ERK, Akt1/2/3, bax and bcl-2 protein levels. SBS rats demonstrated a significant increase in PDGF-α and PDGFR-α expression in jejunum and ileum compared to sham animals. SBS-PDGF-α rats demonstrated a significant increase in bowel and mucosal weight, villus height and crypt depth in jejunum and ileum compared to SBS animals. PDGF-α expression in crypts increased in SBS rats (vs sham) and was accompanied by increased cell proliferation following PDGF-α administration.  A significant decrease in cell apoptosis in this group was correlated with lower bax protein levels. In conclusion, in a rat model of SBS, PDGF-α stimulates enterocyte turnover, which is correlated with up-regulated PDGF-α receptor expression in the remaining small intestine.

DESIGN
Animals were divided randomly into two experimental groups of 6 rats each. Group A rats underwent bowel transection and re-anastomosis (Sham), Group B animals underwent 75% bowel resection (SBS). Due to  the quality of DNA, we performed final analysis from 5 jejunal samples (1 sham and 4 resected rats) and from 7 ileal samples (3 sham and 4 resected rats). Illumina's Digital Gene Expression (DGE) analysis using Illumina Rat Quad BeadChips was used to determine PDGF-related gene expression profiling.

PLATFORM
GPL6101 Illumina ratRef-12 v1.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
22461028

