TITLE
Comparison of transcription profiles of C. neoformans during rabbit or human infection

ORGANISM
Cryptococcus neoformans

SUMMARY
Ubiquitination is a reversible protein modification involved in various cellular processes in eukaryotic cells.   Deubiquitinating enzymes, the proteins responsible for the removal of ubiquitin, act as essential regulators to maintain ubiquitin homeostasis and to exquisitely regulate protein degradation via the ubiquitination pathway.  Cryptococcus neoformans is an important basidiomycete pathogen that causes life-threatening meningoencephalitis primarily within the immunocompromised population.  In order to understand the possible influence deubiquitinating enzymes have on growth and virulence of the model pathogenic yeast Cryptococcus neoformans, we generated deletion mutants of 7 putative deubiquitinase genes.  Compared to other deubiquitinating enzyme mutants, a ubp5∆ mutant exhibited severely attenuated virulence and many distinct phenotypes, including decreased capsule formation, hypomelanization, defective sporulation, and elevated sensitivity to several external stressors (such as high temperature, oxidative and nitrosative stresses, high salts, and antifungal agents).  Ubp5 appears to be the major deubiquitinating enzyme in C. neoformans for maintaining a pool of free ubiquitin for stress responses, supports the evolutionary divergence of Cryptococcus sp. from the model yeast S. cerevisiae, and provides an important paradigm for understanding the potential role of deubiquitination in virulence by other pathogenic fungi.  In addition, other putative deubiquitinase mutants (doa4∆ and ubp13∆) exhibit similar phenotypes to the ubp5∆ mutant, illustrating possible functional overlap among deubiquitinating enzymes in C. neoformans.  Certain functioning deubiquitinating enzymes are essential for the virulence composite of C. neoformans and provide an additional yeast survival and propagation advantage in the host.

DESIGN
New Zealand White rabbits were inoculated with WT strain H99 and harvested by intracisternal spinal tap on days 1, 3, 4, and 7.  For the human sample, RNA was extracted from CSF obtained from a de-identified patient with cryptococcal meningitis.

PLATFORM
GPL4009 UBC/MSL C. neoformans serotype D 70K

CITATIONS
22719877

