TITLE
MicroRNA profiling of the failing heart after myocardial infarction induction and doxorubicin treatment

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
The use of anthracycline antibiotics such as doxorubicin (DOX) has greatly improved the mortality and morbidity of cancer patients. However, the associated risk of cardiomyopathy has limited their clinical application. DOX-associated cardiotoxicity is irreversible and progresses to heart failure (HF). For this reason, a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying these adverse cardiac effects is essential to develop improved regimes that include cardioprotective strategies. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short non-coding RNAs that are able to post-trascriptionally regulate gene expression. MiRNAs have been demonstrated to be involved in both cancer and cardiovascular disease. Therefore, we were interested in unveiling the potential role of miRNAs in chemotherapy-induced HF. We used a combination of three different models to recreate this cardiac toxicity (acute in vitro DOX treatment, DOX-induced HF in vivo and a myocardial infarction -MI- leading to failure model) to study the pattern of dysregulated miRNAs. Using RNA from all three conditions, miRNA microarray profiling was performed and a common miRNA signature was identified. Interestingly, these dysregulated miRNAs have been previously identified as involved in the failing heart.  Our results suggest that DOX is able to alter the expression of miRNAs implicated in HF, in vitro as well as in vivo.

DESIGN
The present study is a microRNA profiling of the damaged cardiac muscle (cardiomyocyte cell population), following either myocardial infarction (MI) induction or doxorubicin (DOX) treatment. Two DOX-treated models were included: ARC exposed to DOX in vitro and a validated DOX-induced heart failure model generated by repeated administration of DOX injections.

PLATFORM
GPL15295 Rat miRNA nCounter Expression Assay Kit

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

