TITLE
Increasing the source/sink ratio in Vitis vinifera (cv Sangiovese) induces extensive transcriptome reprogramming and modifies berry ripening

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
Background: Cluster thinning is an agronomic practice in which a proportion of berry clusters are removed from the vine to increase the source/sink ratio and improve the quality of the remaining berries. Until now no transcriptomic data have been reported describing the mechanisms that underlie the agronomic and biochemical effects of thinning. Results: We profiled the transcriptome of Vitis vinifera cv. Sangiovese berries before and after thinning at veraison using a genome-wide microarray representing all grapevine genes listed in the latest V1 gene prediction. Thinning increased the source/sink ratio from 0.6 to 1.2 m2 leaf area per kg of berries and boosted the sugar and anthocyanin content at harvest. Extensive transcriptome remodeling was observed in thinned vines 2 weeks after thinning and at ripening. This included the enhanced modulation of genes that are normally regulated during berry development and the induction of a large set of genes that are not usually expressed. Conclusion: Cluster thinning has a profound effect on several important cellular processes and metabolic pathways including carbohydrate metabolism and the synthesis and transport of secondary products. The integrated agronomic, biochemical and transcriptomic data revealed that the positive impact of cluster thinning on final berry composition reflects a much more complex outcome than simply enhancing the normal ripening process.

DESIGN
Total RNA recovered from a pool of berries derived from three control plants (C) was compared to total RNA from a pool of berries derived from three cluster thinned vines (50% of cluster removed) at beginning of véraison (BV), end of véraison (EV) and harvest (H). For each sampling date microarray analyses were conducted for three different biological replicates for treatment.

PLATFORM
GPL13936 NimbleGen 090918 Vitus vinifera exp HX12 [090918_Vitus_exp]

CITATIONS
22192855

