TITLE
Expression analysis in multiple muscle groups and serum reveals complexity in the microRNA transcriptome of the mdx mouse and implications for therapy

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small RNAs that regulate gene expression and are implicated in wide-ranging cellular processes and pathological conditions including Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). We have compared differential miRNA expression in proximal and distal limb muscles, diaphragm, heart and serum in the mdx mouse relative to wild-type controls. Global transcriptome analysis revealed muscle-specific patterns of differential miRNA expression as well as a number of changes common between tissues, including previously identified dystromirs. In the case of miR-31 and miR-34c, up-regulation of primary-miRNA transcripts, precursor hairpins and all mature miRNAs derived from the same transcript or miRNA cluster strongly suggests transcriptional regulation of these miRNAs. The most striking differences in differential miRNA expression were between muscle tissue and serum. Specifically, miR-1, miR-133a and miR-206 were highly abundant in serum but down-regulated or modestly up-regulated in muscle, suggesting that these miRNAs are promising disease biomarkers. Indeed, the relative serum levels of these miRNAs were normalised in response to peptide-PMO mediated dystrophin restoration therapy. This study has revealed further complexity in the miRNA transcriptome of the mdx mouse, an understanding of which will be valuable in the development of novel therapeutics and for monitoring their efficacy.

DESIGN
Male WT C57/B10 and male mdx C57/B10  mice (n=4) were sacrificed at eight weeks of age. The heart, quadriceps femoris, and diaphragm were dissected and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen-cooled isopentane. Samples were homogenised using Precellys 24 (Bertin Technologies, France), and RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) as according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

PLATFORM
GPL14613 [miRNA-2] Affymetrix Multispecies miRNA-2 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

