TITLE
Discrete molecular states in the brain accompany changing responses to a vocal signal.

ORGANISM
Taeniopygia guttata

SUMMARY
New experiences can trigger changes in gene expression in the brain. To understand this phenomenon better, we studied zebra finches hearing playbacks of birdsong. Earlier research had shown that initial playbacks of a novel song transiently increase the ZENK (ZIF-268, EGR1, NGFIA, KROX-24) mRNA in the auditory forebrain, but the response selectively habituates after repetition of the stimulus. Here, using DNA microarray analysis, we show that novel song exposure induces rapid changes in thousands of RNAs, with even more RNAs decreasing than increasing. Habituation training leads to the emer- gence of a different gene expression profile a day later, accompanied by loss of essentially all of the rapid " novel " molecular responses. The novel molecular profile is characterized by increases in genes involved in transcription and RNA processing and decreases in ion channels and putative noncoding RNAs. The ‘‘habituated’’ profile is dominated by changes in genes for mitochondrial proteins. A parallel proteomic analysis [2-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) and sequencing by mass spectrometry] also detected changes in mito- chondrial proteins, and direct enzyme assay demonstrated changes in both complexes I and IV in the habituated state. Thus a natural experience, in this case hearing the sound of birdsong, can lead to major shifts in energetics and macromolecular metabolism in higher centers in the brain.

DESIGN
Adult male zebra finches were acoustically isolated and exposed to silence, novel song, or familiar song (exposure to testing song for 3 hours on the day prior to testing) on test day. The auditory lobule (AL) was collected 30 minutes after the onset of the testing experience. All samples were hybridized against the universal SoNG reference RNA pool, 6 biological replicates per group in each of 3 groups.

PLATFORM
GPL9554 Songbird Neurogenomics Initiative 20K Array

CITATIONS
19541599

