TITLE
Genome-wide methylation profiling identifies hypermethylated biomarkers in high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Epigenetic modifications, such as aberrant DNA promoter methylation is frequently observed in cervical cancer. Identification of hypermethylated regions maybe useful for discrimination between normal cervical epithelium and high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN2/3) or worse may improve current cervical cancer population-based screening programs. In this study, the DNA methylome of high-grade CIN lesions were characterised using genome-wide methylation screening to identify potential biomarkers for early diagnosis of cervical neoplasia.   Methyl-DNA Immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) combined with DNA microarray was used to compare DNA methylation profiles of epithelial cells derived from high-grade CIN lesions with normal cervical epithelium resulting in the identification of hypermethylated differentially methylated regions (DMRs). Validation of 9 selected DMRs by MSP or BSP in cervical tissue revealed methylation in 63.2-94.7% high-grade CIN and in 59.3-100% cervical carcinomas. QMSP for the two most significant high-grade CIN-specific methylation markers was applied exploring test performance in a large series of cervical scrapings. Frequency and relative level of methylation were significantly different between normal and cancer samples (p < 0.001). Clinical validation of both markers in cervical scrapings from patients referred with an abnormal cervical smear, confirmed that frequency and relative level of methylation were related with increasing severity of the underlying CIN lesion (p < 0.001) and the ROC analysis was discriminative (p < 0.005). These possible methylation markers represent COL25A1 and KATNAL2 promoters and their observed increased methylation upon progression is in agreement with their biological function (cytoskeleton regulation).   In conclusion, our newly identified hypermethylated DMRs represent specific DNA methylation patterns in high-grade CIN lesions and could be potential biomarkers for early detection.  Epigenetic modifications, such as aberrant DNA promoter methylation is frequently observed in cervical cancer. Identification of hypermethylated regions maybe useful for discrimination between normal cervical epithelium and high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN2/3) or worse may improve current cervical cancer population-based screening programs. In this study, the DNA methylome of high-grade CIN lesions were characterised using genome-wide methylation screening to identify potential biomarkers for early diagnosis of cervical neoplasia.   Methyl-DNA Immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) combined with DNA microarray was used to compare DNA methylation profiles of epithelial cells derived from high-grade CIN lesions with normal cervical epithelium resulting in the identification of hypermethylated differentially methylated regions (DMRs). Validation of 9 selected DMRs by MSP or BSP in cervical tissue revealed methylation in 63.2-94.7% high-grade CIN and in 59.3-100% cervical carcinomas. QMSP for the two most significant high-grade CIN-specific methylation markers was applied exploring test performance in a large series of cervical scrapings. Frequency and relative level of methylation were significantly different between normal and cancer samples (p < 0.001). Clinical validation of both markers in cervical scrapings from patients referred with an abnormal cervical smear, confirmed that frequency and relative level of methylation were related with increasing severity of the underlying CIN lesion (p < 0.001) and the ROC analysis was discriminative (p < 0.005). These possible methylation markers represent COL25A1 and KATNAL2 promoters and their observed increased methylation upon progression is in agreement with their biological function (cytoskeleton regulation).   In conclusion, our newly identified hypermethylated DMRs represent specific DNA methylation patterns in high-grade CIN lesions and could be potential biomarkers for early detection.

DESIGN
MeDIP with subsequent microarray analysis was performed on DNA isolated from frozen macrodissected epithelial tissue of CIN3 lesions (n=15) and normal cervices (n=10).

PLATFORM
GPL9771 NimbleGen Human Meth 385K Prom Plus CpG Array [2006-11-02_HG18_CpG_Promo]

CITATIONS
23018867

