TITLE
Phosphate Starvation of Maize Inhibits Lateral Root Formation and Alters Gene Expression in the Lateral Root Primordium Zone

ORGANISM
Zea mays

SUMMARY
Low phosphate concentrations are frequently a constraint for maize growth and development, and therefore, enormous quantities of phosphate fertilizer are expended in maize cultivation, which increases the cost of planting. Low phosphate stress not only increases root biomass but can also cause significant changes in root morphology. Low phosphate availability has been found to favor lateral root growth over primary root growth by dramatically reducing primary root length and increasing lateral root elongation and lateral root density in Arabdopsis. While in our assay when inbred line Q319 subjected to phosphate starvation, The numbers of lateral roots and lateral root primordia were decreased after 6 days of culture in a low phosphate solution (LP) compared to plants grown under normal conditions (sufficient phosphate, SP), and these differences were increased associated with the stress caused by phosphate starvation. However, the growth of primary roots appeared not to be sensitive to low phosphate levels. This is very different to Arabidopsis. To elucidate how low phosphate levels regulate root modifications, especially lateral root development, a transcriptomic analysis of the 1.0-1.5 cm lateral root primordium zone (LRZ) of maize Q319 treated after 2 and 8 days by low phosphate was completed respectively. The present work utilized an Arizona Maize Oligonucleotide array 46K version slides, which contained 46,000 maize 70-mer oligonucleotides designated by TIGR ID, and the sequence information is available at the website of the Maize Oligonucleotide Array Project as the search item representing the > 30,000 identifiable unique maize genes (details at ).   Keywords: low phosphate, Lateral Root Primordium Zone, maize

DESIGN
Two-condition experiment, low phosphate treated lateral root primordium zone of maize root vs. normal cultrued lateral root primordium zone. Biological replicates: 9 control, 9 treated, independently grown and harvested. One replicate per array.

