TITLE
Silencing or amplification of endocannabinoid signaling in blastocysts via CB1 compromises trophoblast cell migration

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Endocannabinoid signaling plays a key role in multiple events in female reproduction. In this investigation, we discovered an interesting phenomenon that mice with either elevated or silenced endocannabinoid signaling show similar defects in multiple pregnancy events, including preimplantation embryo development. To unravel the underlying mechanisms, microarray studies were was conducted using RNAs collected from WT, Cnr1-/- and Faah-/- mouse blastocysts on day 4 of pregnancy. The results show that about 100 genes showed unidirectional changes under either elevated or silenced endocannabinoid signaling. Analysis of functional grouping of these genes revealed that multiple biological functions and pathways are affected under aberrant endocannabinoid signaling, including cell migration. Several genes from the microarray data were confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR. Cell motility assays validated the predicted compromised cell migration in Cnr1-/- and Faah-/- trophoblast stem cells. This study provides molecular basis for biphasic effects of endocannabinoid signaling in female reproduction

DESIGN
To generate Cnr1-/-, Faah-/- and WT embryos, mutant and WT females were mated with males of the same genotypes. On day 4 of pregnancy at 1500h, embryos were collected from oviducts and uteri of pregnant females, because Cnr1-/- and Faah-/- females show aberrant oviductal transport of embryos. As expected, WT embryos were mostly at the blastocyst stage and all of them were collected from uteri. However, Cnr1-/- and Faah-/- females had higher percentages of embryos at the morula stage, and some of them were still in the oviduct. Since gene expression profiles greatly vary depending on the embryonic development stage, morulae were not included in gene expression analysis; only RNAs from blastocysts were used to better understand the effects solely arising from disrupted cannabinoid signaling in blastocysts.

