TITLE
Expression analysis of Trichoderma reesei QM9414 and delta-blr1, delta-blr2 and delta-env1 in light and darkness

ORGANISM
Trichoderma reesei

SUMMARY
Investigation of whole genome gene expression level changes in response to different light conditions of the T. reesei QM9414 deletion strains delta-blr1, delta-blr2 and delta env1 cultivated on 1% microcrystalline cellulose. Perception and proper interpretation of environmental signals is crucial for survival in any natural habitat. Although the biotechnological workhorse Trichoderma reesei (Hypocrea jecorina) is predominantly known for its capability of efficient plant cell wall degradation, recent studies show that it has not lost its evolutionary heritage. Transmission of nutrient signals via the heterotrimeric G protein pathway has been shown to be influenced by light. We show that this interconnection is mainly established by the light regulatory protein ENV1 and the phosducin-like protein PhLP1 via mutual transcriptional regulation and influence on GNB1 (G protein beta subunit) function. ENV1 thereby exerts a more severe effect on gene transcription than BLR1 or BLR2. Lack of either one of the photoreceptors or PhLP1, GNB1 or GNG1 leads to a partial shutdown of processes upregulated in light, indicating that heterotrimeric G protein signalling exerts its major function in light and is a target of the light response machinery. Consequently, signals transmitted via the G protein pathway are of different relevance in light and darkness. Investigation of regulation of glycoside hydrolases as one of the major output pathways of this mechanism revealed that 79% of all genes belonging to this group, representing all GH-families available in T. reesei, are potentially responsive to light. We conclude that ENV1 is a key factor in connecting nutrient signalling with light response and establishes a signalling output pathway independent of BLR1 and BLR2.

DESIGN
We used two biological replicates of three T. reesei strains (delta-blr1, delta-blr2 and delta-env1), cultivated in constant light (LL, 1800 lux) or constant darkness (DD) on microcrystalline cellulose. The strains used in this study were cultivated, hybridized and analyzed together with strains and samples from GSE27581; the corresponding wild-type strain QM9414 samples have accession numbers GSM683732, GSM683733, GSM683734 and GSM683735.

