TITLE
Murine Kidney Tissue: Unilateral ureteral obstructed mice vs. Sham control

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVE: Loss of renal function is often the impetus for operative intervention in renal obstruction.  Obstructive nephropathy is characterized discrete morphological and physiologic changes including tubular dilatation, apoptosis, and atrophy, as well as interstitial cellular infiltration and progressive interstitial fibrosis. We hypothesize that there are gene expression alterations correlated with obstructive nephropathy that could serve as biomarkers for early intervention. METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were subjected to Unilateral Urethral Obstruction (UUO) or sham surgery at postnatal day 21 of life, and kidneys were harvested after 1, 2, 5 and 9 days postoperatively. RNA was extracted from kidneys and comprehensive gene expression profiling was performed with Agilent microarrays. We used biological replicates: 13 UUO replicates, 9 sham replicates. 2-Channel microarrays were hybridized using universal reference in the Cy3 channel. Ingenuity pathway analysis was used to analyze the biological function and gene networks of gene expression data. RESULTS: Microarray analysis revealed more than 1800 transcripts that were up- or down-regulated over days 1 through 9 following obstruction, and included many transcripts reported previously (FOS, CD44, CLU, SPP1 and EGF). Pathway analysis revealed significant enrichment of transcripts in cell activation/differentiation, immune/inflammatory responses, cell cycle, metabolic process and transport. Interestingly, IPA network analysis showed that transcriptional regulatory pathway involving CEBPB/HNF4A is involved in obstructive nephropathy. CONCLUSIONS: Transcript profiling identified numerous gene expression changes following UUO and suggests a role for CEBPB/HNF4A pathway in obstructive nephropathy. This dataset provides a foundation for development of biomarkers for obstructive nephropathy. Time: day samples were collected post operation Somatic Modification: mice were operated on to generate urethral obstruction (Obstructed/Control)

DESIGN
time_series_design

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
22819101

