TITLE
Strand-specific RNA-seq reveals ordered patterns of sense and antisense transcription in Bacillus anthracis

ORGANISM
Bacillus anthracis

SUMMARY
Although genome-wide transcriptional analysis has been used for many years to study bacterial gene expression, many aspects of the bacterial transcriptome remain undefined.  A prominent example is antisense transcription, which has been observed in a number of bacteria, though the function of antisense transcripts, and their distribution across the bacterial genome, is still unclear.  Single-stranded RNA-seq results revealed a widespread and non-random pattern of antisense transcription covering more than two-thirds of the B. anthracis genome.  Our analysis revealed a variety of antisense structural patterns, suggesting multiple mechanisms of antisense transcription.  The data revealed several instances of sense and antisense expression changes in different growth conditions, suggesting that antisense transcription may play a role in the ways in which B. anthracis responds to its environment.  Significantly, genome-wide antisense expression occurred at consistently higher levels on the lagging strand, while the leading strand showed very little antisense activity. Intrasample gene expression comparisons revealed a gene dosage effect in all growth conditions, where genes farthest from the origin showed the lowest overall range of expression for both sense and antisense directed transcription.  Additionally, transcription from both strands was verified using a novel strand-specific assay. The variety of structural patterns we observed in antisense transcription suggests multiple mechanisms for this phenomenon, indicating that some antisense transcription may play a role in regulating the expression of key genes, while some may be due to chromosome replication dynamics and transcriptional noise.

DESIGN
Four different growth conditions (cold challenge, ethanol challenge, osmotic challenge, control) with four replicates of one read on the bottom strand.

PLATFORM
GPL15353 AB SOLiD System 3.0 (Bacillus anthracis)

CITATIONS
22937038

