TITLE
Expression analyses in Drosophila young virgin female ovary

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Insulators delimit independent transcriptional domains within genomes by constraining enhancer and silencer action. These transcriptional effects depend upon DNA recognition by insulator binding proteins that recruit partners that protect against inappropriate long range modulation of non-target  promoters. Insulator binding proteins are broadly expressed during development, with largely constitutive binding to thousands of genomic sites. Yet, tissue-specific transcriptional changes result from the loss of individual insulator binding proteins.  To understand the molecular basis for such effects, we are studying the classic Drosophila insulator protein Suppressor of Hairy-wing [Su(Hw)]. Genetic studies show that loss of this broadly expressed insulator protein prevents oocyte development. To determine the basis for the block in oogenesis, we coupled transcriptional analyses in su(Hw) mutant ovaries with genome-wide definition of Su(Hw) binding in this tissue. These studies identified 71 direct targets of Su(Hw) regulation, with nearly 70% of these genes showing increased RNA accumulation when Su(Hw) is lost. Surprisingly, derepressed Su(Hw) target genes correspond to genes normally highly expressed in neural tissues, suggesting that Su(Hw) has a critical role in silencing neural genes in the ovary. Support for this postulate was obtained by genetic studies. We found that oocyte production was restored in su(Hw) mutant females that carry a deletion of one allele of the elav  family RNA binding protein 9 (Rbp9) gene. These su(Hw) null oocytes can be fertilized, with evidence that embryos lacking Su(Hw) show compromised development. Our studies extend the known transcriptional activities of Su(Hw), indicating that Su(Hw) can function as an insulator, activator and repressor, the latter function being essential for oogenesis. These findings highlight that insulator proteins are versatile transcriptional regulatory proteins, suggesting that tissue specific contributions to transcription result from direct regulation of individual genes.

DESIGN
Ovaries for RNA isolation were dissected from 4-6 hour old virgin females of wild type, su(Hw)f/v (fertile), su(Hw)2/v (sterile) and su(Hw)Pb/2 (sterile) Drosophila melanogaster. At this stage of development, ovaries only contain egg chamber stages 1-8. Loss of Su(Hw) causes apoptosis at stage 9. Thus, the experimental design compares transcriptionl changes in the ovary prior to induction nof apoptosis in su(Hw) mutants.

PLATFORM
GPL1322 [Drosophila_2] Affymetrix Drosophila Genome 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
23884443

