TITLE
Interferon-related transcriptional program is induced by chronic hepatitis E infection in kidney-transplant recipients

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Hepatitis E Virus (HEV) is a new causative agent of chronic hepatitis in solid organ transplant recipients in Europe. Factors associated with the occurrence and persistence of chronic HEV infection remain largely unknown but chronic evolution seems to be the consequence of host’s immunological factors rather than of viral factors. Method: In a prospective case-control study, we have determined in whole blood of chronically HEV-infected kidney-transplant recipients the host response using microarray technology. Results: Chronically HEV-infected kidney-transplant recipients exhibited a specific transcriptional program, in which interferon effectors were prominent. The intensity of expression of each signature’s gene was significantly lower in patients who were subsequently cleared of HEV than in patients who were not. Furthermore, in patients who were cleared of HEV, a higher expression of these genes was associated with a longer delay until HEV clearance. Conclusions: The specific transcriptional program determined in chronically HEV-infected kidney-transplant recipients suggests an activation of type I interferon response. Intensity of interferon-stimulated genes expression could be useful to forecast the outcome of infection. High expression of interferon-stimulated genes could signify a dysregulation in the interferon response that might favour the persistence of the HEV infection. Trial’s registration number: NCT01090232; Registry’s URL: http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/study/NCT01090232?term=kidney+transplant+recipients & =EU%3AFR & =2

DESIGN
Total RNA was extracted from whole-blood sample or monocytes of kidney-transplant patients with or without chronic hepatitis E (CHE) infection. Control patients were matched up with CHE patients for age, sex, time since kidney transplant and immunosuppressive treatment.

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
23072754

