TITLE
Co-evolution between Grapevine rupestris stem pitting-associated virus and Vitis vinifera L. induces a decrease in defence responses and physiological performance associated with an increase in photosynthesis-related gene transcription

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
Grapevine rupestris stem pitting-associated virus (GRSPaV) is a widespread virus affecting Vitis spp. Although it has established a compatible viral interaction in Vitis vinifera L. without the development of phenotypic alterations, it can occur as distinct variants that show different symptoms in diverse Vitis species. We investigated the changes induced by GRSPaV in V. vinifera cv Bosco, an Italian white grape variety, by combining agronomic, physiological, and molecular approaches, in order to provide comprehensive information about the global effects of GRSPaV. In two consecutive years, this virus caused a moderate decrease in physiological efficiency, yield performance, and sugar content in berries associated with several transcriptomic alterations. Transcript profiles were analysed by microarray techniques in petiole, leaf, and berry samples collected at véraison and by quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) in a time course carried out at five relevant grapevine developmental stages. Global gene expression analyses showed that transcriptomic changes were highly variable among the different organs and the different phenological phases. GRSPaV triggers some unique responses in the grapevine at véraison, never reported before for other plant-virus interactions, such as an increase in transcripts involved in photosynthesis and CO2 fixation, associated with a moderate reduction in the photosynthesis rate and some defence mechanisms, and to an overlap with responses to water and salinity stresses. We hypothesise that the long co-existence between grapevine and GRSPaV has resulted in the evolution of a form of mutual adaptation between the virus and its host. This study contributes to elucidating alternative mechanisms used by infected plants to contend with viruses.

DESIGN
The study was carried out in a vineyard planted in 2002 in Albenga (Liguria), North-West Italy, where a row was established with the white grape cultivar Bosco (V. vinifera L.). Microarray analysis was carried out on leaves, petioles, and berries collected at véraison (E-L35) in 2010. For each of the six GRSPaV-free and six GRSPaV-infected vines selected for the physiological and agronomical parameters evaluation, we collected 6 leaves (3 basal and 3 apical) with the related petioles and 12 berries from 3 different bunches. Samples from each organ were arbitrary pooled in 3 independent biological replicates and total RNA was extracted according to the method described by Gambino et al. (2008).

