TITLE
PYR/PYL receptors play a major role for regulation of transcriptional response to abscisic acid

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Abscisic acid (ABA) is a key hormone for plant growth, development and stress adaptation. Perception of ABA through four types of receptors has been reported. We show here that impairment of ABA perception through the PYR/PYL/RCAR branch reduces vegetative growth and seed production, and leads to a severely open stomata and dramatic ABA insensitive phenotype, even though other branches for ABA perception remain functional. Arabidopsis sextuple mutant impaired in 6 PYR/PYL receptors, namely PYR1, PYL1, PYL2, PYL4, PYL5 and PYL8, was able to germinate and grow even on 100 mM ABA. Whole-rosette stomatal conductance (Gst) measurements revealed that leaf transpiration in the sextuple pyr/pyl mutant was higher than in the ABA-deficient aba3-1 or ABA-insensitive snrk2.6 mutants. The gradually increasing Gst values of plants lacking three, four, five and six PYR/PYLs indicate quantitative regulation of stomatal aperture by this family of receptors. The sextuple mutant lacked ABA-mediated activation of SnRK2s and ABA-responsive gene expression was dramatically impaired as was reported in snrk2.2/2.3/2.6. In summary, these results show that ABA perception by PYR/PYLs plays a major role to regulate seed germination and establishment, basal ABA signaling required for vegetative and reproductive growth, stomatal aperture and transcriptional response to the hormone.

DESIGN
Four biological replicates were generated for the 3 genotypes, pyr1pyl1pyl2pyl4pyl5pyl8 sextuple mutant, snrk2.2/2.3/2.6 triple mutant, and Col-0. All the samples were treated with ABA for 3 hours before harvesting. The four Col-0 samples were mix to create an unique reference Col-0 sample. Two comparasion were made, fisrt one, PYR/PYL sextuple mutant versus Col-0 reference sample and second one, SnRK2 triple mutant versus Col-0 reference sample. In each comparasion four biological replicates were made. Replicas number 1 and 2 were labeled with Cy5 for the mutant sample and Cy3 for the Col-0 reference sample, while the other two replicas,#3 and #4, were reversed-labeled.

PLATFORM
GPL9020 Agilent-021169 Arabidopsis 4 Oligo Microarray (V4) (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
22739828

