TITLE
Muscle Involvement in Preservation of Metabolic Flexibility by a Combination Treatment using n-3 PUFA and Rosiglitazone in Dietary-Obese Mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Impaired resistance to insulin, the key defect in type 2 diabetes (T2D), is associated with a low capacity to adapt fuel oxidation to fuel availability, i.e., metabolic inflexibility. The hampered metabolic adaptability triggers a further damage of insulin signaling. Since skeletal muscle is the main site of glucose uptake, effectiveness of T2D treatment depends in large on the improvement of insulin sensitivity and metabolic adaptability of the muscle. We have shown previously in mice fed an obesogenic high-fat diet that a combination treatment using n-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3 LC-PUFA) and thiazolidinedione (TZD) anti-diabetic drugs preserved metabolic health and synergistically improved muscle insulin sensitivity. We investigated here whether TZD rosiglitazone could elicit the additive beneficial effects on metabolic flexibility when combined with n-3 LC-PUFA. Adult male C57BL/6J mice were fed an obesogenic corn oil-based high-fat diet (cHF) for 8 weeks, or randomly assigned to various dietary treatments: (i) cHF+F, cHF with n-3 LC-PUFA concentrate replacing 15% of dietary lipids; (ii) cHF+ROSI, cHF with 10 mg rosiglitazone/kg diet; and (iii) cHF+F+ROSI, or chow-fed. Indirect calorimetry demonstrated superior preservation of metabolic flexibility to carbohydrates in response to the combination treatment. Metabolomic and gene expression analyses in the muscle suggested distinct and complementary effects of the single treatments, with rosiglitazone augmenting insulin sensitivity by the modulation of branched-chain amino acid metabolism, and n-3 LC PUFA supporting complete oxidation of fatty acids in mitochondria. These beneficial metabolic effects were associated with the activation of the switch between glycolytic and oxidative muscle fibers, especially in the cHF+F+ROSI mice. Our results further support the idea that the combination treatment using n-3 LC-PUFA and TZDs could improve the efficacy of the treatment of obese and diabetic patients.

DESIGN
Male C57BL/6N mice had free access to water and Chow. Three-month-old mice were randomly assigned (8 animals per group) to cHF+ROSI diet (lipid content ~35% wt/wt) supplemented with  10 mg rosiglitazone/kg diet, or cHF+F+ROSI in which n-3 LC-PUFA concentrate (46% DHA, 14% EPA, wt/wt, as triglycerides; product EPAX 1050 TG) replaced 15% wt/wt of dietary lipids. The treatment lasted for 8 weeks, whereafter  the animals were first fasted for 10 hours during the light phase of the day (between 8.00hr and 18.00hr), than re-fed Chow (starting at 18.00hr), and killed the following day by cervical dislocation under pentobarbital anesthesia (between 9.00hr and 11.00hr); the so-called 'diet-switch protocol'. Gastrocnemius muscle was isolated and used for total RNA isolation.

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
22952760

