TITLE
Comparison of Atlantic salmon individuals with different outcomes of cardiomyopathy syndrome (CMS)

ORGANISM
Salmo salar

SUMMARY
Experimentally infected Atlantic salmon post-smolts exhibited different outcomes of disease (CMS). High responder (HR) fish were characterized with sustained and increased viral load and pathology in heart tissue. Low responder (LR) fish showed declining viral load from 6-10 weeks post infection (wpi) and absence of pathology. Global gene expression analyses were performed to compare these groups. Virus-responsive genes involved in early antiviral and innate immune responses were upregulated equally in LR and HR at the first stage (2-4 wpi), reflecting the initial increase in virus replication. Repression of heart muscle development indicated the early onset of pathology. By six weeks both responder groups had comparable viral loads, while increased pathology was observed in HR fish. This was reflected by induced expression of genes implicated in apoptosis and cell death, presumably related to lymphocyte regulation and survival. In contrast, LR fish showed earlier activation of NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity and NOD-like receptor signaling pathways. At the late stage of infection, increased pathology and viral load in HR was accompanied by a broad activation of genes involved in adaptive immunity and particularly T cell responses, probably reflecting the increased infiltration and homing of virus-specific T cells to the infected heart. This was in sharp contrast to LR fish, where recovery and reduced viral load was associated with a significantly reduced transcription of adaptive immunity genes and activation of genes involved in energy metabolism.

DESIGN
Atlantic salmon post smolts (average weight 50g) were challenged with the putative CMS causing pathogen (PMCV). Heart was sampled from challenged and control fish at 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 wpi. Heart pathology was detectable earliest at 6 wpi and from this time-point, individuals were assigned to HR and LR.

PLATFORM
GPL10705 Agilent Salmon Immunity and Quality 44k custom array_SIQ3 GPL10706 Agilent Salmon Immunity and Quality 44k custom array_SIQ4

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

