TITLE
Genes showing differential expression profiles in control and in neoplastic growth using drosophila wing imaginal tissues

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Classical regeneration experiments in insects have demonstrated an important role for imaginal tissues (also called discs, the larval tissues that give rise to the adult appendages) in coupling tissue growth, maturation and patterning during development We used the rotund-Gal4 driver (Rn > ) for disc-targeted silencing of the avalanche gene (avl; Rn > avl-RNAi), encoding a syntaxin that functions in the early endocytic machinery (H. Lu, D. Bilder, Nat Cell Biol 7, 1232; Dec, 2005). Rn > avl-RNAi discs reach near to normal size after 5 days of development, and then undergo unrestricted neoplastic growth. We were interested in identifying genes showing differential expression profiles in control and in neoplastic growth. We identified dilp8 as one of the most differentially expressed gene in control and Rn > avl-RNAi discs. Abstract from the associated publication: Little is known about how organ growth is monitored and coordinated with the developmental timing in complex organisms. In insects, impairment of larval tissue growth delays growth and morphogenesis, revealing a coupling mechanism.  We carried out a genetic screen in Drosophila to identify molecules expressed by growing tissues participating in this coupling and identified dilp8 as a gene whose silencing rescues the developmental delay induced by abnormally growing tissues. dilp8 is highly induced in conditions where growth impairment produces a developmental delay. dilp8 encodes a peptide whose expression and secretion is sufficient to delay metamorphosis without affecting tissue integrity. We propose that dilp8 is a secreted signal that coordinates the growth status of tissues with developmental timing.

DESIGN
RNA were extracted from wing discs of either Rn > + or Rn > Avl RNAi staged third larval instar at 92, 116 or 168 hours AED (After Egg Deposition) using Qiagen RNeasy lipid tissue microkit according to the manufacturer protocol. Three separate samples were collected for each time point.

PLATFORM
GPL1322 [Drosophila_2] Affymetrix Drosophila Genome 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
22556251

