TITLE
MicroRNA-214 downregulation contributes to tumor angiogenesis via inducing secretion of hepatoma-derived growth factor in human hepatoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Abstract: Background & Aims: Unusual hypervascularity is a hallmark of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Although microRNA-214 (miR-214) is upregulated in other human cancers, it is downregulated in HCC. We elucidated the biological and clinical significance of miR-214 downregulation in HCC. Methods: MicroRNAs deregulated in HCC were identified using array-based MicroRNA profiling. A luciferase reporter assay confirmed target association between miR-214 and hepatoma-derived growth factor (HDGF). Tube formation and in vivo angiogenesis assays validated the roles of miR-214/HDGF in angiogenesis. Results: MiR-214 downregulation was associated with higher tumor recurrence and worse clinical outcomes. Ectopic expression of miR-214 suppressed xenograft tumor growth and microvascularity of the tumor and its surrounding tissues. The genes downregulated by ectopic expression of miR-214 were involved in the regulation of apoptosis, cell cycle, and angiogenesis. Integrated analysis disclosed HDGF as a downstream target of miR-214. Conditioned medium of HCC cells contained bioactivity to stimulate tube formation of human umbilical vein endothelial cells, which was abolished by pretreatment of the conditioned media with HDGF antibodies, silencing of HDGF expression or ectopic expression of miR-214 in the donor HCC cells. The angiogenic activity of the conditioned media lost by ectopic expression of miR-214 in the donor cells was restored by supplementation with recombinant HDGF. In vivo tumor angiogenesis assays showed significant suppression of tumor vascularity by ectopic expression of miR-214. Conclusions: A novel role of microRNA in tumrigenesis is identified. Downregulation of miR-214 contributes to unusual hypervascularity of HCC via activation of the HDGF paracrine pathway for tumor angiogenesis.

DESIGN
To identify miRNAs that are deregulated in human HCC, 68 HCC and 21 non-tumor liver tissues were subjected to profiling of miRNA expression using miRNA arrays containing 739 human miRNA probes. Differentially expressed microRNAs were identified.

PLATFORM
GPL8179 Illumina Human v2 MicroRNA expression beadchip

CITATIONS
22613005

