TITLE
TLS-CHOP Fusion Oncoprotein Regulates MicroRNA-486 in Human Myxoid Liposarcoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens ; Mus musculus

SUMMARY
MicroRNAs (miRNAs, miRs) are small noncoding RNAs, which control or are controlled by the dysregulation of multiple protein-coding oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes, play important roles in carcinogenesis. Myxoid liposarcomas (MLS) are characterized by t(12;16)(q13;p11) translocation and expression of TLS/CHOP chimeric transcripts (various types) which encode different oncogenic proteins.  TLS-CHOP is important for the molecular mechanisms in the development of MLS, but the involvement in microRNA expression still remain poorly understood. Thus we explored the target microRNA of TLS-CHOP influence cell-proliferation or cell death with microarray. MicroRNAs (miRNAs, miRs) are small noncoding RNAs, which control or are controlled by the dysregulation of multiple protein-coding oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes, play important roles in carcinogenesis. Myxoid liposarcomas (MLS) are characterized by t(12;16)(q13;p11) translocation and expression of TLS/CHOP chimeric transcripts (various types) which encode different oncogenic proteins.  TLS-CHOP is important for the molecular mechanisms in the development of MLS, but the involvement in microRNA expression still remain poorly understood.  In this study, we have found that miR-486-5p (miR-486) expression level was downregulated by ectopic expression of TLS-CHOP fusion gene in mouse fibroblast cells (NIH3T3). In addition, we found overexpression of miR-486 inhibited the cell growth in the 2645/94 cells and in situ hybridization of miR-486 showed MLS tissues had lower signal intensity compared with non-tumor tissues. Thus we explored the target genes of miR-486 influence cell-proliferation or cell death with microarray.

DESIGN
We compared the microRNA profiles of cells treated with TLS-CHOP or empty vector about NIH-3T3 cell-line. We compared the whole mRNA profiles of cells transfected with miR-486 oligonucleotides or control oligo about myxoid liposarcoma cell-line.

PLATFORM
GPL8755 PF - Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K GPL15390 Custom miRCURY LNA microRNA Array ready-to-spot probe sets V7.1

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

