TITLE
Sex-biased gene expression during head development in a sexually dimorphic stalk-eyed fly

ORGANISM
Teleopsis dalmanni

SUMMARY
Stalk-eyed flies (family Diopsidae) are a model system for studying sexual selection due to the elongated and sexually dimorphic eye-stalks found in many species. These flies are of additional interest because their X chromosome is derived largely from an autosomal arm in other flies. To identify candidate genes required for development of dimorphic eyestalks and investigate how sex-biased expression arose on the novel X we compared gene expression between males and females using oligonucleotide microarrays and RNA from developing eyestalk tissue or adult heads in the dimorphic diopsid, Teleopsis dalmanni. Microarray analysis revealed sex-biased expression for 26% of 3,748 genes expressed in eye-antennal imaginal discs and concordant sex-biased expression for 86 genes in adult heads. Overall, 415 female-biased and 482 male-biased genes were associated with dimorphic eyestalk development but not differential expression in the adult head.  Functional analysis revealed that male-biased genes are disproportionately associated with growth and mitochondrial function while female-biased genes are associated with cell differentiation and patterning or are novel transcripts.  With regard to chromosomal effects, dosage compensation occurs by elevated expression of X-linked genes in males. Genes with female-biased expression were more common on the X and less common on autosomes than expected, while male-biased genes exhibited no chromosomal pattern.  Rates of protein evolution were lower for female-biased genes but higher for genes that moved on or off the novel X chromosome.  These findings cannot be due to meiotic sex chromosome inactivation or by constraints associated with dosage compensation.  Instead, they could be consistent with sexual conflict in which female-biased genes on the novel X act primarily to reduce eyespan in females while other genes increase eyespan in both sexes. Additional information on sex-biased gene expression in other tissues and related sexually monomorphic species could confirm this interpretation.

DESIGN
Two-condition experiment, female vs. male RNA using larval eye discs and adult heads for one species (Teleopsis dalmanni).

PLATFORM
GPL15419 Agilent-020839 Teleopsis dalmanni 579_FLS_slide_II (condensed version)

CITATIONS
23527273

