TITLE
Uncovering small RNA-mediated responses to cold stress in a wheat thermosensitive genic male sterile line by deep sequencing (Degradome-Seq)

ORGANISM
Triticum aestivum

SUMMARY
The male sterility of thermosensitive genic male sterile (TGMS) lines of wheat (Triticum aestivum) is strictly controlled by temperature. The early phase of anther development is especially susceptible to cold stress. MicroRNAs (miRNA) play an important role in plant development and in responses to environmental stress. In this study, deep sequencing of small RNA (smRNA) libraries obtained from spike tissues of the TGMS line under cold and control conditions identified a total of 81 unique miRNA sequences from 30 families, and trans-acting small interfering RNAs (tasiRNAs) derived from two TAS3 genes. To identify smRNA targets in the wheat TGMS line, we applied the degradome sequencing method, which globally and directly identifies the remnants of smRNA-directed target cleavage. We identified 26 targets of 16 miRNA families and three targets of tasiRNAs. Comparing smRNA sequencing datasets and TaqMan qPCR results, we identified six miRNAs and one tasiRNA (tasiRNA-ARF) as cold stress-responsive smRNAs in spike tissues of the TGMS line. We also determined the expression profiles of target genes that encode transcription factors in response to cold stress. Interestingly, expressions of cold-stress responsive smRNAs integrated in the auxin-signaling pathway and their target genes were largely anticorrelated. We investigated tissue-specific expression of smRNAs using a tissue microarray approach. Our data indicated that miR167 and tasiRNA-ARF play roles in regulating the auxin-signaling pathway, and possibly in the developmental response to cold stress. These data provide evidence that smRNA regulatory pathways are linked with male sterility in the TGMS line during cold stress.

DESIGN
Examination of 2 mRNA degradome libraries in spike tissues during cold and control condition

PLATFORM
GPL10467 Illumina Genome Analyzer (Triticum aestivum)

CITATIONS
22508932

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
