TITLE
Olig2 defines subpopulations of retinal progenitor cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Previous lineage analyses have shown that retinal progenitor cells (RPCs) are multipotent throughout development, and expression profiling studies have shown a great deal of molecular heterogeneity among RPCs. To determine if the molecular heterogeneity predicts that an RPC will produce particular types of progeny, clonal lineage analysis was used to investigate the progeny of a subset of RPCs, those that express the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, Olig2. In contrast to the large and complex set of clones generated by viral marking of random embryonic RPCs, the embryonic Olig2+ RPCs underwent terminal divisions, producing small clones with primarily two of the five cell types being made by the pool of RPCs at that time. The embryonically produced cell types made by Olig2+ RPCs were cone photoreceptors and horizontal cell (HC) interneurons. Moreover, the embryonic Olig2+ RPC did not make the later Olig2+ RPC. The later, postnatal Olig2+ RPCs also made terminal divisions, which were biased towards production of rod photoreceptors and amacrine cell (AC) interneurons. These data indicate that the multipotent progenitor pool is made up of distinctive types of RPCs, which have biases towards producing subsets of retinal neurons in a terminal division, with the types of neurons produced varying over time. This strategy is similar to that of the developing Drosophila melanogaster ventral nerve cord, with the Olig2+ cells behaving as ganglion mother cells.

DESIGN
Single retinal cells were isolated in tubes containing lysis buffer, their mRNAs were reverse transcribed, and the resulting cDNAs were PCR amplified for 35 cycles. Labeled cDNA samples were hybridized to Affymetrix 430 2.0 microarrays and the data was normalized using MAS5.0 software. These cells were examined for the expression of Olig2 or other bHLH factors.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
22543161

