TITLE
The two-component system ChrSA is crucial for heme tolerance and interferes with HrrSA in heme-dependent gene regulation in Corynebacterium glutamicum

ORGANISM
Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC 13032

SUMMARY
We recently showed that the two-component system (TCS) HrrSA plays a central role in the control of heme homeostasis in the Gram-positive soil bacterium Corynebacterium glutamicum. Here, we characterized the function of another TCS of this organism, ChrSA, which exhibits significant sequence similarity to HrrSA, and provide evidence for cross-regulation of the two systems. In this study ChrSA was shown to be crucial for heme resistance of C. glutamicum by activation of the putative heme-detoxifying ABC-transporter HrtBA in the presence of heme. Deletion of either hrtBA or chrSA resulted in a strongly increased sensitivity towards heme. DNA microarray analysis and gel retardation assays with the purified response regulator ChrA provided evidence for ChrA being a repressor of the heme biosynthesis operon hemAC and hemH and an activator of the ctaE-qcrCAB operon, encoding subunits of the cytochrome bc1-aa3 supercomplex of the respiratory chain. The heme oxygenase gene, hmuO, showed a strongly decreased mRNA level in the ΔchrSA mutant, but no significant binding of ChrA was observed in vitro. Promoter fusion studies of PchrSA with eyfp indicated positive autoregulation of the chrSA operon in the presence of heme. Interestingly, ChrA was also shown to bind to the hrrA promoter and to repress transcription of the paralog response regulator, suggesting a close link between HrrSA and ChrSA. Mutational analysis and in silico prediction resulted in the deduction of a 16-bp weakly conserved inverted repeat as consensus DNA-binding motif of ChrA. Altogether, the present study emphasizes ChrSA as a second TCS, besides HrrSA, involved in heme-dependent gene regulation in C. glutamicum.

DESIGN
To identify the influence of ChrSA on global gene expression , DNA microarray analyses were performed with the ΔchrSA mutant compared to C. glutamicum wild type. For this purpose RNA was isolated from exponentially growing cells cultivated in CgXII minimal medium with 4% glucose and either 2.5 µM FeSO4 or 2.5 µM hemin as iron source. Three biological replicates were performed.

PLATFORM
GPL15451 FZ_IBT1_C. glutamicum_10K_ver2 array

CITATIONS
23038807

