TITLE
Regulation of synovial DKK1 expression by local glucocorticoid metabolism in inflammatory arthritis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Inflammatory arthritis is associated with bone loss and fractures due to abnormal bone remodelling. Bone remodelling is 'uncoupled' with bone resorption increased and bone formation suppressed. These changes resemble those seen in patients treated with therapeutic glucocorticoids, and in both of these situations, altered wnt signalling is implicated. Recent studies have highlighted the importance of the synovial fibroblast in mediating abnormal bone remodelling during inflammation. The wnt antagonist dickkopf-1 (DKK1) is secreted by synovial fibroblasts in response to inflammation, and this protein has been proposed to be a master regulator of bone remodelling in inflammatory arthritis. Here we show that DKK1 expression by primary human synovial fibroblasts is more potently regulated by glucocorticoids than pro-inflammatory cytokines. Glucocorticoids, but not TNF-alpha, regulated expression of multiple wnt agonists and antagonists in favour of inhibition of wnt signalling. In vitro TNF-alpha and IL1-beta indirectly regulate DKK1 production through increased expression of the glucocorticoid activating enzyme 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11beta-HSD1). These results demonstrate that the links between synovial inflammation, altered wnt signalling and bone remodelling may not be direct but are dependent on local activation of endogenous glucocorticoids.

DESIGN
Human fibroblast-like synoviocytes isolated from patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with either vehicle, TNF or dexamethasone (dex). Gene arrays for control, TNF and dexamethasone treatments were performed on three separate synovial fibroblast cell lines isolated from three rheumatoid arthritis patients. All fold changes displayed are the combined results of the three separate fibroblast lines.

PLATFORM
GPL15482 Applied Biosystems/University of Birmingham Human RT-PCR array

CITATIONS
23079210

