TITLE
New insights into key genes and pathways involved in the pathogenesis of HLA-B27-associated acute anterior uveitis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
HLA-B27-associated inflammatory diseases remains one of the strongest HLA-disease known to date. HLA-B27-associated acute anterior uveitis has wide-ranging medical significance due to its ocular, systemic, immunologic, and genetic features. To investigate the genes and signalling pathways located upstream of the inflammatory processes in HLA-B27-associated acute anterior uveitis will help to know the mechanism of this disease. HLA-B27-positive and -negative monocytes isolated from human peripheral blood were stimulated with Vibrio cholera lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Gene expression microarrays were used to identify the differentially expressed genes, and they were analysed by a series of bioinformatics-based techniques. Gene expression microarray analysis revealed marked differences between B27-positive monocytes in the genes that are upregulated in response to LPS stimulation. Gene Ontology enrichment (GO) and pathway analysis indicated that genes participating in protein transport and folding were essential to the inflammatory process. The LPS receptor, TLR4, induced the Toll-like receptor signalling pathway and pathways related to Vibrio cholerae infection, which are located upstream of the network and contribute to the overall response. Among the DE genes, PIK3CA, PIK3CB, AKT3, and MAPK1 may play critical roles in inflammation.Equivalent LPS stimulation induces a different response in HLA-B27-positive monocytes compared to monocytes lacking this HLA protein, suggesting that the TLR pathway is involved in the pathogenesis of HLA-B27-associated AAU. Blocking this pathway and other pathways by siRNA interference of candidate genes may contribute to the development of a treatment for this type of AAU.

DESIGN
HLA-B27-positive monocytes isolated from human peripheral blood were stimulated with Vibrio cholera lipopolysaccharide (LPS) for 12 hours.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

