TITLE
Human cerebrospinal fluid autoantibody lipid microarray profiling (Fig. 1A)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Lipids comprise 70% of the myelin sheath, and autoantibodies against lipids may contribute to the demyelination that characterizes multiple sclerosis (MS). We used lipid antigen microarrays and lipid mass spectrometry to identify bona fide lipid targets of the autoimmune response in MS brain and an animal model of MS to explore the role of the identified lipids in autoimmune demyelination. We found that autoantibodies in MS target a phosphate group in phosphatidylserine and oxidized phosphatidylcholine derivatives. Administration of these lipids ameliorated experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by suppressing activation and inducing apoptosis of autoreactive T cells, effects mediated by the lipids' saturated fatty-acid side chains.  Thus, phospholipids represent a natural anti-inflammatory class of compounds that have potential as novel therapeutics for MS.

DESIGN
Fig. 1A. Lipid-array profiling of IgG+IgM antibody reactivity in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples from MS patients (relapsing remitting MS; secondary progressive MS; primary progressive MS), healthy controls, and other neurological disease controls. Lipid hits with the lowest FDR (q=0.048) were clustered according to their reactivity profiles. 48 different lipids were custom-spotted in duplicate using the CAMAG Automatic TLC Sampler (ATS4) robot to spray 200 nl of 10 to 100 pmol of lipids onto PVDF membranes affixed to the surface of microscope slides. The slides were probed with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from 59 human patient samples. 60 slides total: 18 relapsing-remitting MS, 14 secondary-progressive MS, 1 primary-progressive MS, 21 other neurological disease, 5 healthy control, 1 secondary Ab alone (not included in this submission). CSF diluted 1/10. HRP-conjugated secondary Ab (goat anti-human IgM/IgG) diluted 1/8000. ECL for 3 minutes.

PLATFORM
GPL15505 SUWHR Lipids 104 v1.0

CITATIONS
22674551

