TITLE
Identification of tissue microRNAs predictive of sutinib activity in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Purpose: To identify tissue microRNAs predictive of sunitinib activity in patients with metastatic renal-cell carcinoma (MRCC) and to validate them in a cellular model. Selected microRNAs were studied in serum from MRCC patients and healthy individuals. Methods: We screened 673 microRNAs using TaqMan Low-density Arrays (TLDAs) in tumors from MRCC patients with extreme phenotypes of marked efficacy and resistance to sunitinib, selected from an identification cohort (n=41). Differentially expressed microRNAs were selected using bioinformatics-based target prediction analysis and quantified by qRT-PCR in tumors from patients presenting similar phenoytpes selected from an independent cohort (n=117). Results were validated in a cellular model of sunitinib resistance and studied in serum from healthy individuals and MRCC patients. Results: TLDAs identified 64 microRNAs differentially expressed in the identification cohort. Seven candidates were quantified by qRT-PCR in the independent series. MiR-942 was the most accurate predictor of sunitinib efficacy (p=0.0074). High expression of miR-942, miR-133a, miR484, and miR-628-5p was significantly associated with decreased time-to-progression and overall survival. These microRNAs were overexpressed in the sunitinib resistant cell line Caki-2 in comparison with the sensitive parental cell line. Serum levels of miR-942, miR-133a, miR-484, miR-146a-5p, miR-374a and miR-486-5p were significantly reduced in MRCC patients compared to healthy controls. Conclusions: Our strategy identified differentially expressed microRNAs in MRCC patients presenting marked sensitivity and resistance to sunitinib. Mir-942 was the best predictor of efficacy. Results were confirmed in a cellular model of sunitinib resistance. We also identified exosome derived serum microRNAs differentially expressed in MRCC patients and healthy individuals.

DESIGN
Taqman Low Density Array for 6 FFPE tissues obtained from extreme phenotype MRCC patients, (n=3 marked resistance to sunitinib treatment patients and n=3 marked sensitivity to sunitinib treatment patients), was performanced to screen 667 microRNAs.

PLATFORM
GPL13329 TaqMan(r) Array Human MicroRNA B Cards v2.0 GPL13987 Taqman Array Human MicroRNA A Card v2.0

CITATIONS
24475095

