TITLE
Pla2g12b and Hpn are Genes Identified by Mouse ENU Mutagenesis that affect HDL cholesterol

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Despite considerable progress understanding genes that affect the HDL particle, its function, and cholesterol content, genes identified to date explain only a small percentage of the genetic variation. We used N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea mutagenesis in mice to discover novel genes that affect HDL cholesterol levels. Two mutant lines (Hlb218 and Hlb320) with low HDL cholesterol levels were established. Causal mutations in these lines were mapped using linkage analysis: For line Hlb218 within a 12 Mbp region on Chr 10; and for line Hlb320 within a 17 Mbp region on Chr 7. High-throughput sequencing of Hlb218 liver RNA identified a mutation in Pla2g12b. The transition of G to A leads to a cysteine to tyrosine change and most likely causes a loss of a disulfide bridge. Microarray analysis of Hlb320 liver RNA showed a 7-fold downregulation of Hpn; sequencing identified a mutation in the 3′ splice site of exon 8. Northern blot confirmed lower mRNA expression level in Hlb320 and did not show a difference in splicing, suggesting that the mutation only affects the splicing rate. In addition to affecting HDL cholesterol, the mutated genes also lead to reduction in serum non-HDL cholesterol and triglyceride levels. Despite low HDL cholesterol levels, the mice from both mutant lines show similar atherosclerotic lesion sizes compared to control mice. These new mutant mouse models are valuable tools to further study the role of these genes, their affect on HDL cholesterol levels, and metabolism.

DESIGN
Mutant mice were generated as part of The Jackson Laboratory’s Heart, Lung, Blood, and Sleep Disorder Mutagenesis Program by treating male C57BL/6J (B6) mice with N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU). Third generation (G3) mice were phenotyped to ensure capture of both dominant and recessive mutations. Two unique G3 animals with low HDL cholesterol levels were then used to establish new inbred lines (Hlb218 and Hlb320) by mating them with B6 mice and intercrossing the offspring with low HDL cholesterol for 7 generations. Livers from 3 Hlb218, 3 Hlb320 males, and 6 B6 male controls were obtained for gene expression analysis. The samples were randomized over Illumina Mouse-6 Expression 1.1 BeadChips .

PLATFORM
GPL6099 Illumina mouse-6 v1.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

