TITLE
Neonatal diethylstilbestrol exposure alters the metabolic profile of uterine epithelial cells.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Developmental exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES) causes reproductive tract malformations, affects fertility and increases the risk of clear cell carcinoma of the vagina and cervix in humans. Previous studies on a well-established mouse DES model demonstrated that it recapitulates many features of the human syndrome, yet the underlying molecular mechanism is far from clear. Using the neonatal DES mouse model, the present study uses global transcript profiling to systematically explore early gene expression changes in individual epithelial and mesenchymal compartments of the neonatal uterus.  Over 900 genes show differential expression upon DES treatment in either one or both tissue layers. Interestingly, multiple components of the Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor gamma (PPAR gamma)-mediated adipogenic/lipid metabolic pathway, including PPARgamma itself, are targets of DES in the neonatal uterus. TEM and Oil Red O staining further demonstrate a dramatic increase in lipid deposition in the uterine epithelial cells upon DES exposure. Neonatal DES exposure also perturbs glucose homeostasis in the uterine epithelium. Some of these neonatal DES-induced metabolic changes appear to last into adulthood, suggesting a permanent effect of DES on energy metabolism in uterine epithelial cells. This study extends the list of biological processes that can be regulated by estrogen or DES, and provides a novel perspective for endocrine disruptor induced reproductive abnormalities.

DESIGN
We separated UE from the UM from vehicle (oil)- or DES-treated postnatal day 5 (P5) mice, and prepared biological triplicates of RNA from pooled specimens (n≥3). Those samples were analyzed on two MouseWG-6 BeadChips, which detects 45,200 transcripts including more than 26,000 annotated genes in the NCBI RefSeq database. Difference of at least twofold in signal intensity of each given probe set with a P-value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

PLATFORM
GPL6887 Illumina MouseWG-6 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
22679223

