TITLE
Functional annotation of genes differentially expressed between primary motor and prefrontal association cortices of macaque brain

ORGANISM
Macaca mulatta

SUMMARY
DNA microarray-based genome-wide transcriptional profiling and gene network analyses were used to characterize the molecular underpinnings of the frontal neocortical organization in rhesus macaque, with particular focus on the differences in the functional annotation of genes in the primary motor cortex and the prefrontal association cortex. Biofunctional analysis of the differentially expressed genes showed that the list of genes selectively expressed in the primary motor cortex were enriched with genes involved in development, oligodendrocyte function, and increased energy consumption, whereas the list of genes selectively expressed in the prefrontal association cortex were enriched with genes involved in cell morphology and calcium dynamics. These functional differences in selectively expressed genes may reflect the fundamental molecular structure of each cortex.

DESIGN
Brain tissue was obtained from 4 adolescent rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) aged between 2.6 and 2.7 years that had been bred in group cages without being subjected to any experimental treatment. Adequate measures were taken to minimize pain and discomfort, in accordance with the National Institute of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (NIH Publication No. 80–23). The monkeys were perfused with 500–1000 ml of ice-cold saline containing heparin sodium (1000 U/ml, Novo Heparin; Leo Pharmaceutical Products, Ballerup, Denmark) through the ascending aorta within 15 min of an overdose injection of pentobarbital sodium (50 mg/kg, i.p., Somnopentyl; Kyoritsu Shoji, Tokyo, Japan). The 2 neocortical areas (M1 and A46) were identified by sulcal landmarks. We used the forelimb region of M1 for the present analysis, which is located around the superior genu of the central sulcus. A46 was obtained from both the upper and lower banks of the principal sulcus. Each area from the left hemispheres was dissected on crushed ice and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen.

PLATFORM
GPL14569 Agilent-015421 Rhesus Macaque Gene Expression Microarray (Probe Name Version)

CITATIONS
23054074

