TITLE
Application of BiodegPhyloChip for expression profiling of functional genes from diverse contaminated habitats

ORGANISM
soil metagenome

SUMMARY
Understanding the bacterial community structure, and their functional analysis for active bioremediation process is essential to design better and cost effective strategies. Microarray analysis enables us to simultaneously study the functional and phylogenetic markers of hundreds of microorganisms which are involved in active bioremediation process in an environment. We have previously described development of a hybrid 60-mer multibacterial microarray platform (BiodegPhyloChip) for profiling the bacterial communities and functional genes simultaneously in environments undergoing active bioremediation process (Pathak et al; Appl Microbiol Biotechnol,Vol. 90, 1739-1754). The present study involved profiling the status of bacterial communities and functional (biodegradation) genes using the developed 60-mer oligonucleotide microarray BiodegPhyloChip at five contaminated hotspots in the state of Gujarat, in western India. The expression pattern of functional genes (coding for key enzymes in active bioremediation process) at these sites was studied to understand the dynamics of biodegradation in the presence of diverse group of chemicals. The results indicated that the nature of pollutants and their abundance greatly influence the structure of bacterial communities and the extent of expression of genes involved in various biodegradation pathways. In addition, site specific factors also play a pivotal role to affect the microbial community structure as was evident from results of 16S rRNA gene profiling of the five contaminated sites, where the community structure varied from one site to another drastically.

DESIGN
Agilent one-color CGH experiment and one-color Gene Expresssion expereiment,Organism: Genotypic designed Agilent-17159  Genotypic designed  Agilent  Multibacterial 8x15k Array , Labeling kits:  Agilent Genomic DNA labeling Kit (Part Number: 5190-0453) and Agilent Quick Amp Kit PLUS (Part number: 5190-0442).

PLATFORM
GPL10926 Agilent-017159 Genotypic custom 60-mer oligonucleotide multibacterial microarray

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T
