TITLE
Scaling proprioceptor gene transcription by retrograde NT3 signaling

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Transcriptional analysis of identified DRG subpopulations. Cell-type specific intrinsic programs instruct neuronal subpopulations before target-derived factors influence later neuronal maturation. Retrograde neurotrophin signaling controls neuronal survival and maturation of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) sensory neurons, but how these potent signaling pathways intersect with transcriptional programs established at earlier developmental stages remains poorly understood. Here we determine the consequences of genetic alternation of NT3 signaling on genome-wide transcription programs in proprioceptors, an important sensory neuron subpopulation involved in motor reflex behavior. We find that the expression of many proprioceptor-enriched genes is dramatically altered by genetic NT3 elimination, independent of survival-related activities. Combinatorial analysis of gene expression profiles with proprioceptors isolated from mice expressing surplus muscular NT3 identifies an anticorrelated gene set with transcriptional levels scaled in opposite directions. Voluntary running experiments in adult mice further demonstrate the maintenance of transcriptional adjustability of genes expressed by DRG neurons, pointing to life-long gene expression plasticity in sensory neurons.

DESIGN
We combined a mouse line expressing GFP under the control of the TrkC promoter (BAC transgene approach) with various NT3 signaling  mutants in order to identify the transcriptional changes in identified subpopulations of dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons. Sorted cells were processed for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays. Analysis was performed a postnatal (p) day p0. Subsequent analysis focused on the transcriptional profile of DRG neuron subpopulations at specific lumbar levels. Additional work addressed the transcriptional changes in whole DRG in adult mice with and without physical exercise.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
23029089

