TITLE
Expression profiling of genes involved in dedifferentiation and redifferentiation during somatic embryogenesis in cotton

ORGANISM
Gossypium hirsutum

SUMMARY
We used a next-generation sequencing approach, Illumina Digital Gene Expression (DGE) technology, to Genome-wide profiling of gene expression during cotton SE. As a result, 5,076 differentially expressed genes were identified during cotton SE. Expression profile and functional assignments of these genes indicated significant transcriptional complexity during this process. Transcription factor-encoding genes were found to be differentially regulated during SE. The complex pathways of auxin abundance, transport and response with differentially regulated genes revealed that the auxin-related transcripts belonged to IAA biosynthesis, indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) metabolism, IAA conjugate metabolism, auxin transport, auxin-responsive protein / indoleacetic acid-induced protein (Aux/IAA), auxin response factor (ARF), small auxin-up RNA (SAUR), Aux/IAA degradation, and other auxin-related proteins, which allow an intricate system of auxin utilization to achieve multiple purposes in SE. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed on selected genes with different expression patterns and functional assignments were made to demonstrate the utility of RNA-Seq for gene expression profiles during cotton SE. We report here the first comprehensive analysis of transcriptome dynamics that may serve as a gene expression profile blueprint in cotton SE. Our main goal was to adapt the RNA-Seq technology to this notable development process and to analyse the gene expression profile. Complex auxin signalling pathway and transcription regulation were highlighted. Together with biochemical and histological approaches, this study provides comprehensive gene expression data sets for cotton SE that serve as an important platform resource for further functional studies in plant embryogenesis.

DESIGN
differential gene expression analysis at 9 time-points/stages during somatic embryogenesis in cotton by deep sequencing, using Illumina GAIIx.

PLATFORM
GPL9362 Illumina Genome Analyzer (Gossypium hirsutum)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

