TITLE
Mechanisms of interaction between ectomycorrhizal fungi and the mycorrhiza helper bacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens BBc6R8

ORGANISM
Pseudomonas fluorescens BBc6R8

SUMMARY
Mycorrhiza helper bacteria (MHB) promote the formation of ectomycorrhizae between tree roots and ectomycorrhizal fungi. Despite the high relevance of MHB for forestry and for sustainable tree production in tree nurseries, little is known about the properties of the bacteria that contribute to their helper abilities. The MHB strain Pseudomonas fluorescens BBc6R8 is used as a model to study the mechanisms of the helper effect. We took advantage of new technologies to obtain, for the first time, the whole genome sequence of an MHB. Analyses reveal an important plasticity of the genome with numerous functions acquired by horizontal gene tranfer. Genome mining was combined with transcriptomic and mutagenesis approaches to reveal molecular determinants of the helper effect. The data suggest that the production of helper molecules is likely to be constitutive in vitro. The helper effect appears to be pleiotropic and to rely, for a substantial part, on trophic interactions. Despite its helper abilities, the bacterium is also able in specific conditions to outcompete ectomycorrhizal fungi and inhibit their growth. We conclude that the helper bacterium possess a broad range of properties whose expression depending on the biotic and abiotic conditions can result in either a beneficial, neutral or antagonistic interaction between the plant, the ectomycorrhizal fungus and the bacterium.

DESIGN
The study was performed along a kinetic with three sampling times: before contact between the bacterial colonies and the fungus (14 days after inoculation), at the time of contact (16 days after inoculation) and after an extended period of contact (21 days). For each time, three independent replicates were performed. A control treatment without the fungus was performed in triplicate and sampled at 14 days.

PLATFORM
GPL15608 NimbleGen Pseudomonas fluorescens BBc6R8 array [080718_Pfluor_Bbc6_expr]

CITATIONS
25724953

