TITLE
Effect of cFP on gene expression in Vibiro cholerae

ORGANISM
Vibrio cholerae O1 biovar El Tor str. N16961

SUMMARY
Vibrio cholerae is a Gram negative, motile, facultative anaerobic bacterium, and the causative agent of cholera, a severe diarrhoeal disease, which untreated can rapidly lead to dehydration, hypotensive shock, and death. Cholera is a significant human disease that is estimated to affect 3-5 million people each year. The mechanism by which V. cholerae regulates virulence gene expression in vivo is unknown, but a number of studies have suggested that low molecular weight signally molecules may be important in modulating gene expression. cFP is a low molecular weight cyclic dipeptide produced by multiple Vibrio species. Evidence previously generated in our laboratory showed that cFP inhibited the production of the virulence factors cholera toxin (CT) and the toxin coregulated pilus (TCP) in O1 El Tor V. cholerae strain N16961 during growth under virulence gene inducing conditions. cFP inhibition of CT and TCP production correlated with reduced transcription of several regulators that belong  to the ToxR regulon. To identify additional cFP-responsive genes we performed microarray experiments with the O1 El Tor V. cholerae strain N16961. In these experiments N16961 was grown under virulence gene inducing conditions in the presence and absence of cFP before RNA was extracted and hybridized to microarrays. The results showed that cFP positively affected the expression of the LysR-family regulatory protein LeuO. This finding suggests the possibility that LeuO may be mediating cFP-dependent regulation of gene expression in response to environmental cFP.

DESIGN
V. cholerae N16961 was grown under AKI growth condition in the presence or absence of 1 mM cFP for 2.5 or 3 hours when total RNA was extracted, differentially labelled and hybridized to microarrays. Four independent experiments were performed.

PLATFORM
GPL15619 JCVI PFGRC Vibrio cholerae 13K v3 array designed primarily based on strain N16961 [Full array version]

CITATIONS
23982069

