TITLE
DNA methyltransferases are required to induce heterochromatic re-replication in Arabidopsis.

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
The relationship between epigenetic marks on chromatin and the regulation of DNA replication is poorly understood. Mutation of the H3K27 methyltransferase genes, ARABIDOPSIS TRITHORAX-RELATED PROTEIN5 (ATXR5) and ATXR6, result in re-replication (repeated origin firing within the same cell cycle). Here we show that mutations that reduce DNA methylation act to suppress the re-replication phenotype of atxr5 atxr6 mutants. This suggests that DNA methylation, a mark enriched at the same heterochromatic regions that re-replicate in atxr5/6 mutants, is required for aberrant re-replication. In contrast, RNA sequencing analyses suggest that ATXR5/6 and DNA methylation cooperatively transcriptionally silence transposable elements (TEs). Hence our results suggest a complex relationship between ATXR5/6 and DNA methylation in the regulation of DNA replication and transcription of TEs.

DESIGN
DNA-seq: One gram of mature rosette leaves were collected from 3-4-week-old plants, chopped in 0.5 ml of filtered Galbraith buffer, and stained with propidium iodide. A BD FACS Aria II in the UCLA Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center (JCCC) Flow Cytometry Core Facility was used to sort the nuclei.  For sequencing, 7,000-9,000 8C nuclei of each sample were collected, and purified DNA with Picopure purification kit (Arcturus) following manufacturer instructions. RNA-seq: RNA-seq experiments were performed in two biological replicates for each genotype. 0.1g of tissue was ground in Trizol.  Total RNA were treated with DNaseI (Roche), and cleaned up with phenol-chlorophorm and precipitated with ethanol. Libraries were generated and sequenced following manufacturer instructions (Illumina). BS-seq: 0.5-1g of mature rosette leaves were collected, and genomic DNA was extracted using Plant DNeasey mini purification kit (Qiagen). Libraries were generated as previously described (Feng et al., Methods Mol Biol. 2011;733:223-38.).

PLATFORM
GPL9302 Illumina Genome Analyzer II (Arabidopsis thaliana) GPL11221 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Arabidopsis thaliana) GPL13222 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Arabidopsis thaliana)

CITATIONS
22792077 , 23021223

