TITLE
Single Cell Transcriptomic Analysis of Prostate Cancer Cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The ability to interrogate circulating tumor cells (CTC) and disseminated tumor cells (DTC) is restricted by the small number detected and isolated (typically < 10).  We wanted to determine if a commercially available technology could provide a transcriptomic profile of a single prostate cancer (PCa) cell.  We clonally selected and cultured a single passage of cell cycle synchronized C4-2B PCa cells.  Ten sets of single, 5-, or 10-cells were isolated using a micromanipulator under direct visualization with an inverted microscope.  Additionally, we analyzed 10 individual DTC isolated from each of 2 patients with metastatic PCa.  We have shown that a transcriptomic profile can be obtained from a single cell using commercially available technology.  As expected, fewer amplified genes are detected from a single-cell sample than from pooled cell samples, but this method can be used to obtain a transcriptomic profile from DTC isolated from the bone marrow of patients with PCa.

DESIGN
Custom Agilent 44K whole human genome expression oligonucleotide microarrays were used to profile clonally selected and cultured single passage of cell cycle synchronized C4-2B PCa cells isolated using a micromanipulator under direct visualization with an inverted microscope into ten sets of single, 5-, or 10-cells.  Single disseminated tumor cells were isolated from bone marrow (BM) samples of two advanced prostate cancer patients. Essentially, a two-step selection process was employed, in which anti-CD45 and anti-CD61 conjugated to immunomagnetic beads were used for negative selection, and anti-HEA was used for positive selection. Cells were then fluorescently stained for BerEP4, counter stained with RPE anti-CD45, and individually selected (10 single cells each per patient) under fluorescent light using a micropipette system for further analysis. RNA was amplified using the WT-Oviation one-direct system and hybridization against a common reference pool of prostate tumor cell lines. Data from C42B cell data and data from single cells isolated from the bone marrow of patients were normalized and analyzed separately.

