TITLE
Translational microarray analysis of liver samples treated with PredTox hepatotoxic compound FP014SC

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Liver samples were lysed (15 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 300 mM NaCl and 15 mM MgCl2, plus inhibitors (1 mg/ml heparin 100 µg/ml cycloheximide and 80 U RNAsin)), added  to a 10-50% sucrose gradient and ultracentrifuged at 182,000x g for 2 hours. The gradient was aliquotted into 16 1ml fractions and added to Tri reagent (Sigma). RNA was extracted as per the manufacturer's instructions and then sub-pooled into fractions corresponding to monosomes, light polysomes, medium polysomes and heavy polysomes, according to ribosomal density (more ribosomal occupancy = higher translational activity = heavier, and therefore, located in the more dense fractions). Microarray analysis was performed by hybridising control (vehicle treated) monosomes against test (high-dose treated) monosomes on one microarray, control light polysomes against test light polysomes on a second microarray, and so forth for each sub-pool of fractions. Following microarray analysis there were a maximum of four values for each mRNA, corresponding to the proportional representation of that mRNA within each sub-pool of fractions. By calculating the change in values, i.e. degree of slope, across the monosomal region, the light polysomal region, the medium polysomal region and the dense polysomal region it was possible to determine any translational change in activity. In addition, the overall transcriptional change could be analysed for each mRNA.

DESIGN
Dual colour microarrays performed on n = 3 samples, implementing a dye swap design. Control samples were treated with vehicle only. The treated samples had 1120mg/kg of the compound (Tetraethyl[(3-hydroxy-2-pyridyl)amino]-methanediphosphonate) for 15 days.

PLATFORM
GPL15713 MRC Toxicology Unit Mus musculus 23k MEEBO probe set slide A GPL15714 MRC Toxicology Unit Mus musculus 23k MEEBO probe set slide B

CITATIONS
23586759

