TITLE
Serum Follistatin-Like Protein 1 Is a Biomarker for Macrophage Activation Syndrome and May Predict Disease Course in Systemic Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Objective. Follistatin-like protein 1 (FSTL-1) is a secreted glycoprotein that is over-expressed in certain inflammatory diseases.  Our objective in this study was to correlate FSTL-1 levels with measures of clinical disease activity in systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA), including macrophage activation syndrome (MAS). Methods. FSTL-1 serum levels were measured by ELISA in 28 patients with sJIA, including 7 patients who developed MAS, as well as in 30 normal controls.  Levels were correlated with erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), ferritin and sIL-2Rα expression.  Differential gene expression based on FSTL-1 levels was analyzed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Results. FSTL-1 serum levels were elevated at time of presentation (pre-treatment) of sJIA (mean 200.7 ng/ml) and decreased to normal (mean 133.7 ng/ml) over 24 months (p < 0.01). FSTL-1 levels were markedly elevated during acute MAS (mean 279.8 ng/ml) and decreased to normal (mean 120.3 ng/ml) following treatment (p < 0.001).  FSTL-1 levels correlated with serum markers of inflammation, including sIL-2Rα and ferritin, in patients with MAS.  PBMCs from patients with FSTL-1 levels > 200 ng/ml showed an increase in expression of genes related to innate immunity and erythropoiesis, and decrease in NK cell function.  Patients with the highest FSTL-1 levels at disease onset ( > 300 ng/ml) ultimately required cyclosporine treatment. Conclusion. In patients with sJIA, serum FSTL-1 is a biomarker for MAS and FSTL-1 levels at presentation may predict subsequent disease course.  Patients with FSTL-1 levels > 200 ng/ml had altered gene expression patterns suggestive of subclinical MAS and may represent a subgroup of sJIA with more severe disease.

DESIGN
FSTL-1 serum levels were measured by ELISA in 28 patients with sJIA, including 7 patients who developed MAS, as well as in 30 normal controls.  Levels were correlated with erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), ferritin and sIL-2Rα expression.  Differential gene expression based on FSTL-1 levels was analyzed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Only 11 patients were run on microarray.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

