TITLE
High-Resolution Transcriptome Maps Reveal Strain-Specific Regulatory Features of Multiple Campylobacter jejuni Isolates

ORGANISM
Campylobacter jejuni subsp. jejuni NCTC 11168 = ATCC 700819 ; Campylobacter jejuni RM1221 ; Campylobacter jejuni subsp. jejuni 81-176 ; Campylobacter jejuni subsp. jejuni 81116

SUMMARY
Campylobacter jejuni is currently the leading cause of bacterial gastroenteritis in humans. Comparison of multiple Campylobacter strains revealed a high genetic and phenotypic diversity. However, little is known about differences in transcriptome organization, gene expression, and small RNA (sRNA) repertoires. Here we present the first comparative primary transcriptome analysis based on the differential RNA–seq (dRNA–seq) of four C. jejuni isolates. Our approach includes a novel, generic method for the automated annotation of transcriptional start sites (TSS), which allowed us to provide genome-wide promoter maps in the analyzed strains. These global TSS maps are refined through the integration of a SuperGenome approach that allows for a comparative TSS annotation by mapping RNA–seq data of multiple strains into a common coordinate system derived from a whole-genome alignment. Considering the steadily increasing amount of RNA–seq studies, our automated TSS annotation will not only facilitate transcriptome annotation for a wider range of pro- and eukaryotes but can also be adapted for the analysis among different growth or stress conditions. Our comparative dRNA–seq analysis revealed conservation of most TSS, but also single-nucleotide-polymorphisms (SNP) in promoter regions, which lead to strain-specific transcriptional output. Furthermore, we identified strain-specific sRNA repertoires that could contribute to differential gene regulation among strains. In addition, we identified a novel minimal CRISPR-system in Campylobacter of the type-II CRISPR subtype, which relies on the host factor RNase III and a trans-encoded sRNA for maturation of crRNAs. This minimal system of Campylobacter, which seems active in only some strains, employs a unique maturation pathway, since the crRNAs are transcribed from individual promoters in the upstream repeats and thereby minimize the requirements for the maturation machinery. Overall, our study provides new insights into strain-specific transcriptome organization and sRNAs, and reveals genes that could modulate phenotypic variation among strains despite high conservation at the DNA level.

DESIGN
Our dRNA-seq study of multiple C. jejuni strains represents the first comparative analysis of the primary transcriptomes of multiple strains and provides new insights into riboregulation in this bacterial pathogen.

PLATFORM
GPL15728 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Campylobacter jejuni subsp. jejuni 81116) GPL15729 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Campylobacter jejuni subsp. jejuni 81-176) GPL15730 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Campylobacter jejuni subsp. jejuni NCTC 11168 = ATCC 700819) GPL15731 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Campylobacter jejuni RM1221)

CITATIONS
23696746

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
