TITLE
Molecular mechanisms underpinning physiological tolerances to salinity and alkaline salinity in Brassica juncea

ORGANISM
Brassica juncea

SUMMARY
In low rainfall regions soils are naturally conditioned with frequent co-occurrence of salinity and alkalinity. Plant salinity responses both at physiological and molecular level have been extensively researched. However, effects of the combined treatment of alkaline salinity that could greatly reduce plant growth and the mechanisms responsible for tolerance remain indeterminate. In Brassica juncea, large reductions in biomass and increased leaf Na+ concentration under alkaline salinity indicates that the combined treatment had greater negative effect than salinity on both growth and the physiological responses of the plant. To determine molecular mechanisms potentially controlling adaptive tolerance responses to salinity and alkaline salinity, the moderately tolerant genotype NDR 8501 was further investigated using microarray analysis. The transcripts of treated leaf tissues verses those of the untreated control sample were analysed after prolonged stress of four weeks. In total, 528 salinity responsive and 1245 alkaline salinity responsive genes were indentified and only 101 genes were expressed jointly in either of the two treatments. Transcription of 37% more genes involved in response to alkaline salinity than salinity alone, which suggests the increased impact and severity of the combined stress on the plant, indicating the transcription of a far greater number of genes likely involved in mitigation and damage control. Transcription of KUP2 and KUP7 genes involved in potassium homeostasis under salinity alone and NHX1 and ENH1 genes for ion (K+ and Na+) homeostasis under alkaline salinity, clearly demonstrated that different genes and genetic pathways are involved in response to each stress. They further provide supporting evidence for the physiological responses that occur in the plant, with massive reprogramming of the transcriptome leading to partial ion exclusion, shuttling and compartmentation.

DESIGN
Salinity and alkaline salinity induced gene expression in Brassica juncea leaf was measured at 4 weeks of prolonged treatment of 50 mM NaCl alone and combined with 2.5 mM HCO3- versus non-stressed control. A single experiment was conducted using Brassica juncea genotype NDR 8501 at a single time point (fours weeks after treatment) with three replications per treatment.

PLATFORM
GPL15739 Agilent-022520 Brassica napus 4x44K (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

