TITLE
Mutational analysis of the pentose phosphate pathway and the Entner-Doudoroff pathway in Gluconobacter oxydans reveals improved growth of an edd-eda deletion mutant on mannitol

ORGANISM
Gluconobacter oxydans 621H

SUMMARY
The obligatory aerobic acetic acid bacterium Gluconobacter oxydans 621H oxidizes sugars and sugar alcohols primarily in the periplasm and only a small fraction is metabolized in the cytoplasm. The latter can occur either via the Entner-Doudoroff pathway (EDP) or via the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). The Embden-Meyerhof pathway is non-functional and a cyclic operation of the tricarboxylic acid cycle is prevented by the absence of succinate dehydrogenase. In this work, the cytoplasmic catabolism of fructose formed by oxidation of mannitol was analyzed with a Δgnd mutant lacking the oxidative PPP and a Δedd-eda mutant devoid of the EDP. The growth characteristics of the two mutants under controlled conditions with mannitol as carbon source and enzyme activities showed that the PPP is the main route for cytoplasmic fructose catabolism, whereas the EDP is dispensable and even unfavorable. The Δedd-eda mutant (lacking 6-phosphogluconate dehydratase and 2-keto-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate aldolase) formed 24% more cell mass than the reference strain. In contrast, deletion of gnd (6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase) severely inhibited growth and caused a strong selection pressure for secondary mutations inactivating glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, thus preventing fructose catabolism via the EDP, too. These Δgnd zwf* mutants were almost totally disabled in fructose catabolism, but still produced about 14% of the carbon dioxide of the reference strain, possibly by catabolizing substrates from the yeast extract. Overexpression of gnd in the reference strain improved biomass formation in a similar manner as deletion of edd-eda, further confirming the importance of the PPP for cytoplasmic fructose catabolism.

DESIGN
The three transcriptome comparisons of Δupp Δgnd zwf* vs. Δupp and of Δupp Δedd-eda vs. Δupp, and of Δupp Δgnd versus Δupp, were repeated independently three times in biological replicates resulting in 3 x 3 hybridizations as termed by sample 1 to 9.

PLATFORM
GPL15741 FZ_IBG-1_Goxydans_10K_Ver1 array

CITATIONS
22843527

