TITLE
Gene expression profiling of lung tissues from patients with combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema (CPFE) is characterized by upper-lobe emphysema combined with lower-lobe fibrosis and a high prevalence of pulmonary hypertension. The aim of this study was to measure and analyze gene expression profiles in the lungs of CPFE patients. The results showed that the expression profiles of the fibrotic and emphysematous lesions were remarkably different in terms of function. Genes related to immune system, structural constituents of cytoskeleton, and cellular adhesion were overexpressed in fibrotic lesions, while genes associated with cellular fraction, cell membrane structures, vascular growth and biology, second-messenger-mediated signaling, and lung development (all processes that contribute to the destruction and repair of cells, vessels, and lung) were overexpressed in emphysematous lesions. The differences in gene expression were detected in fibrotic and emphysematous lesions in CPFE patients. We propose that the development of coexisted fibrotic and emphysematous lesions in CPFE is implemented by these different patterns of gene expressions.

DESIGN
Lung tissue specimens from fibrous lesions and emphysematous lesions of 3 patients with combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema (CPFE) were obtained for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays. We hypothesized that coexisted fibrosis and emphysema in CPFE are programmed by differential gene expressions in the corresponding lesions in the lungs of smokers susceptible to CPFE. Given the importance of genetic susceptibility in understanding the etiology and pathogenesis of CPFE, we examined tissues from patients with CPFE to systemically identify genes significantly expressed in lung tissues with fibrotic lesions as well as genes significantly expressed in tissues with emphysematous lesions.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

