TITLE
Comparative gene expression profile of human limbal stromal cells, bone marrow mesenchymal cells, adipose cells and foreskin fibroblasts

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Limbal stromal cells were reported to resemble mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) with multipotential differentiation cability. However, little is known about their gene expression profiles compared to MSC derived from various sources. In this study, the gene expression profile of limbal stromal cells was compared to bone marrow, adipose stromal cells and foreskin fibroblasts. In addition, we also explored the gene expression changes of ex vivo expanded limbal stromal cells when cultured in two different systems. Expanded limbal stromal cells were divided into two groups; each cultured separately on a matrigel-coated plate in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with bFGF and LIF and the other on a normal plate in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Cryopreserved bone marrow mesenchymal cells, adipose stromal cells and foreskin fibroblasts were cultured-expanded until confluent. Total RNA was extracted from all the samples and subjected to microarray experiments with an Agilent platform by using Human GE 8x60k microarrays. Data analysis was carried out with GeneSpring software. A total of 871 genes were upregulated when the limbal stromal cells were cultured in the matrigel system, whereas 58 genes were consistently differentially expressed in limbal stromal cells compared to other lineages. Besides the long intergenic non-coding RNA and unknown genes, these genes represent gene ontology for cellular components, molecular function and biological process. Samples derived from the same source were closely clustered by Hierachical clustering analysis. The limbal stromal cells have a distinct molecular signature compared to MSCs from other lineages. The culture system affected the gene expression profile of limbal stromal cells tremendously.

DESIGN
Derived limbal stromal cells were cultured using two different methods, one with matrigel and the other with FBS. Their gene expression profiles were compared. The gene expression profile of limbal stromal cells that were cultured with FBS also was compared to the gene expression profiles of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells, adipose stromal cells and foreskin fibroblasts.

