TITLE
Leukocyte transcript alterations in West-African girls following a booster vaccination with diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccine

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Observational studies from low-income countries have shown that the vaccination against diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis (DTP) is associated with excess female mortality due to infectious diseases. To investigate possible changes in gene expression after DTP vaccination, we identified a group of nine comparable West African girls, from a biobank of 356 children, who were due to receive DTP booster vaccine at age 18 months. We extracted RNA from blood samples before, and 6 weeks after, vaccination to analyse the coding transcriptome in leukocytes using expression microarrays, and ended up with information from eight girls. The data was further analysed using dedicated array pathway and network software. We aimed to study whether DTP vaccination introduced a systematic alteration in the immune system in girls. We found very few transcripts to alter systematically. Those that did mainly belonged to the interferon (IFN) signalling pathway. We scrutinized this pathway as well as the interleukin pathways. Two out of eight showed a down-regulated IFN pathway and two showed an up-regulated IFN pathway.  The two with down-regulated IFN pathway had also down-regulated IL-6 pathway. In the study of networks, two of the girls stood out as not having the inflammatory response as top altered network. In conclusion, the transcriptome changes following DTP booster vaccination were subtle, but it is possible to identify sub groups that deviate from each other, mainly in the IFN response.

DESIGN
Microarrays (Human Exon 1.0 ST Arrays (Affymetrix )) were used to compare the gene expression alteration following DTP-vaccination in 18-19 months old West African girls. The gene expression analysis was based on RNA from venous blood. The blood was drawn immediately before DTP-vaccination (baseline sample) and 6 weeks after (42 -50 days, post-vaccination sample) in a total of eight girls

