TITLE
Systems Biology approach to identify transcriptome reprogramming in Arabidopsis thaliana during insect and bacterial attack (Brevicoryne brassicae)

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
We have implemented an integrated Systems Biology approach to analyze overall transcriptomic reprogramming and systems level defense responses in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana during an insect (Brevicoryne brassicae) and a bacterial (Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato strain DC3000) attack. The main aim of this study was to identify the attacker-specific and general defense response signatures in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana while attacked by phloem feeding aphids or pathogenic bacteria. Defense responses and networks, unique and specific for aphid or Pseudomonas  stresses were identified. Our analysis revealed a probable link between biotic stress and microRNAs in Arabidopsis and thus opened up a new direction to conduct large-scale targeted experiments to explore detailed regulatory links among them. The presented results provide a first comprehensive understanding of Arabidopsis - B. brassicae and Arabidopsis - P. syringae interactions at a systems biology level.

DESIGN
Arabidopsis thaliana (ecotype Colombia-0) seeds were grown in 6-cm-diameter pots filled with a sterile soil mix (1.0 part soil and 0.5 part horticultural perlite), 3 plants per pot. Plants were kept in growth chambers Vötsch VB 1514 (Vötsch Industrietechnik GmbH, Germany) under the following conditions: a 16/8 h (light/dark) photoperiod at 22°C/18°C, 40%/70% relative humidity, and 70/0 μmol m-2s-1 light intensity. After 32 days plants had 8 fully developed leaves. Each plant was infested with 32 wingless aphids [Brevicoryne Brassicae] (4 per leaf), which were transferred to leaves with a fine paintbrush. Infested plants and aphid-free controls were kept in plexiglass cylinders. Plants were harvested 72 h after infestation between the 6th and 8th hour of the light photoperiod. Four biological replicates were prepared from aphid infested and control plants, each sampled from 15 individual plants. Whole rosettes were cut at the hypocotyls and aphids were removed by washing with Milli-Q-filtered water. Differences in transcriptional responses were measured by comparing genes expression of aphid infested plants against non-infested control plants.

PLATFORM
GPL15699 Arabidopsis thaliana 34K NARC serie 7

CITATIONS
23536844

