TITLE
Systems Biology approach to identify transcriptome reprogramming in Arabidopsis thaliana during insect and bacterial attack (Pseudomonas syringae)

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
We have implemented an integrated Systems Biology approach to analyze overall transcriptomic reprogramming and systems level defense responses in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana during an insect (Brevicoryne brassicae) and a bacterial (Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato strain DC3000) attack. The main aim of this study was to identify the attacker-specific and general defense response signatures in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana while attacked by phloem feeding aphids or pathogenic bacteria. Defense responses and networks, unique and specific for aphid or Pseudomonas  stresses were identified. Our analysis revealed a probable link between biotic stress and microRNAs in Arabidopsis and thus opened up a new direction to conduct large-scale targeted experiments to explore detailed regulatory links among them. The presented results provide a first comprehensive understanding of Arabidopsis - B. brassicae and Arabidopsis - P. syringae interactions at a systems biology level.

DESIGN
Arabidopsis thaliana (ecotype Colombia-0) seeds were sown into 6-cm-diameter pots filled with a sterile soil mix (1.0 part soil and 0.5 part horticultural perlite). Plants were kept in growth chambers Vötsch VB 1514 (Vötch Industrietechnik GmbH, Germany) with a 8/16 h (light/dark) photoperiod at 22/18 °C, 40/70% relative humidity, and 70/0 mmol m-2 s-1 light intensity. The Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato strain DC3000 culture was grown overnight in 10 ml of Kings B solution supplemented with antibiotics rifampicin (50 μg ml−1) and kanamycin (25 μg ml−1). Overnight culture was washed once in 10 mM MgCl2 and final cell densities were adjusted to approximately 0.20 at 600 nm (approximately 1.5 × 108 cfu ml−1) in 10 mM MgCl2. Plants were mock-challenged with 10 mM MgCl2 or inoculated with DC3000 strain, 3-4 leaves were infiltrated on the abaxial surface with a needleless 1-ml syringe.Whole rosettes were cut at the hypocotyls and harvested from Pseudomonas infested and mock-infected plants after 72 hours treatment. 4 biological replicates were prepared from each treatment, each containing rosettes from 15 individual plants. Differences in transcriptional responses were measured by comparing genes expression of Pseudomonas infected plants against mock-infected control plants.

