TITLE
The CURELUNG Project from the Epigenetics Side (Patients dataset)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a very common solid tumor where only small advances in the reduction of relapse-free survival and overall survival have been accomplished. The issue is particularly critical for stage I patients where there are not available biomarkers, in the absence of detectable nodal or other metastatic involvement, that might indicate which high-risk patients should receive the beneficially proved adjuvant chemotherapy. We aimed to find DNA methylation markers with prognostic value that could be helpful in this regard and complement the conventional staging. A DNA methylation microarray that analyzes 450,000 CpG sites in the human genome was used to study primary tumoral DNA obtained from a multicenter cohort of 490 patients with NSCLC, corresponding to 339 adenocarcinomas, 133 squamous carcinomas and 18 large cell carcinomas, in addition to 25 normal lung epithelium samples. The obtained prognostic DNA methylation markers were validated by the development of a single methylation-pyrosequencing assay in an independent cohort of 143 patients with stage I NSCLC. The unsupervised clustering of the studied primary NSCLC distinguished two branches with distinct clinical outcomes. Those CpG sites that were the best predictors of recurrence in stage I NSCLC patients were further confirmed in the described independent cohort. Both the global DNA methylation classifier and the highly-ranked aberrantly methylated single genes improved prognostic accuracy beyond standard stagings.

DESIGN
DNA was quantified by Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA Reagent (Invitrogen) and the integrity was analyzed in a 1.3% agarose gel. Bisulfite conversion of 600 ng of each sample was performed according to the manufacturer's recommendations for the Illumina Infinium Assay. Effective bisulfite conversion was checked for three controls that were converted simultaneously with the samples. 4 ul of bisulfite-converted DNA were used to hybridize on an Infinium HumanMethylation 450 BeadChip, following the Illumina Infinium HD Methylation protocol. Chip analysis was performed using the Illumina HiScan SQ fluorescent scanner. The intensities of the images were extracted using GenomeStudio (2011.2) Methylation module (1.8.5) software. The methylation score of each CpG is represented as a beta value. This dataset includes 444 patient samples.

PLATFORM
GPL13534 Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (HumanMethylation450_15017482)

CITATIONS
24081945

