TITLE
Pathogen recognition and activation of the innate immune response in zebrafish: MyD88 mutants

ORGANISM
Danio rerio

SUMMARY
MyD88 is an adaptor protein in Toll-like receptor and interleukin 1 receptor mediated signaling pathways that plays an essential role in activation of immune responses following pathogen recognition. We investigate that role in the zebrafish embryo model by using a zebrafish mutant line that contains a premature stop condon in the gene encoding MyD88, leading to a truncated protein that lacks domains important for its normal function. We infected these MyD88 mutants and wildtype individuals with Salmonella typhimurium and Edwardsiella tarda to compare the resulting immune response by transcriptome profiling on total RNA isolated from single embryos. The data derived from these microarray experiments confirms the vital role of MyD88 in pathogen recognition and provides many leads for further research.

DESIGN
This microarray study was designed to determine the effect of a truncation of the MyD88 protein on the innate immune response of zebrafish embryos during infection with Salmonella typhimurium and Edwardsiella tarda. Embryos used in this study are derived from an incross between parents heterozygous for the mutation. Both homozygous mutants and their wildtype siblings were selected by genotyping after being injected with the bacteria or PBS as control. RNA was isolated from single embryos and each treatment group consisted of three embryos: (1) Homozygous mutants injected with PBS 8 hours post infection (hpi), (2) wildtype siblings injected with PBS 8hpi, (3) S. typhimurium-infected homozygous mutants 8hpi, (4) S. typhimurium-infected wildtype siblings 8hpi, (5) Homozygous mutants injected with PBS 8 hours post infection (hpi) (E.tarda control), (6) wildtype siblings injected with PBS 8hpi (E. tarda control), (7) E. tarda-infected homozygous mutants 8hpi, (8) E. tarda-infected wildtype siblings 8hpi. Embryos were grown at 28.5–30°C in egg water and manually dechorionated at 24 hours post fertilization (hpf). Subsequently, embryos were infected at 28 hpf by micro-injecting 200 colony forming units (CFU) of S. typhimurium SL1027 or E. Tarda FL-F60, or were mock-injected with buffer as a control.  After injections embryos were transferred into fresh egg water and incubated for 8 h or 4 days at 28°C. After the incubation period, single embryos were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and RNA was isolated for microarray analysis. All treatment groups were analyzed using a common reference approach.

PLATFORM
GPL10042 LU/IBL_D.rerio_Agilent_44k_021626

CITATIONS
23471913

