TITLE
Genome wide expression profiling during spinal cord regeneration identifies comprehensive cellular responses in zebrafish

ORGANISM
Danio rerio

SUMMARY
Among the vertebrates, teleost and urodele amphibians are capable of regenerating their central nervous system. We have used crush injury method on zebrafish spinal cord, which is a common mammalian mode of injury in spinal cord. To identify the molecular mechanisms of the underlying cellular events during regeneration of zebrafish spinal cord, we have employed high density oligonucleotide microarrays and profiled the temporal transcriptome dynamics during the entire phenomenon. A total of 3842 genes expressed differentially with significant fold changes during spinal cord regeneration. Cluster analysis revealed event specific dynamic expression of genes related to inflammation, cell death, cell migration, cell proliferation, neurogenesis, neural patterning and axonal regrowth. We have also validated the expression pattern of 14 genes (which include inflammatory regulators, cell cycle regulators, pattern forming genes and signaling molecules) by different methodologies. Spatio-temporal analysis of STAT3 expression suggested its possible function in controlling inflammation and cell proliferation.  Genes involved in the proliferating neural progenitors and their dorso-ventral patterning (sox2 and dbx2) are differentially expressed. Injury induced cell proliferation is controlled by many cell cycle regulators and some of them also show their common expression in other regenerating systems like fin, heart and retina. We also reported unusual expression pattern of certain pathway genes like one carbon folate metabolism and N-glycan biosynthesis which have not been reported during regeneration of spinal cord. Genes like stat3, socs3, atf3, mmp9 and sox11, which are known to control peripheral nervous system (PNS) regeneration in mammals, are also upregulated in zebrafish spinal cord injury (SCI) thus creating PNS like environment after injury. Our study provides a comprehensive genetic blue print of diverse cellular response(s) during regeneration of zebrafish spinal cord that could be used to induce successful regeneration in mammals.

DESIGN
The spinal cord has been injured by crushing dorso-ventrally for 1 sec with a number 5 Dumont forceps at the level of 15th/16th vertebrae. Later the wound were sealed by placing a suture. Both spinal cord injured and sham operated fish were allowed to regenerate and the progress of regeneration was observed after 1, 3, 7, 10 and 15 days of injury. Zebrafishes were anesthetized deeply for 5 minutes in 0.1% tricaine (MS222; Sigma, USA) and approximately 1mm length of spinal cord both rostrally and caudally from injury epicenter were dissected out from 50-60 fishes in each batch and pooled for RNA extraction.

PLATFORM
GPL15799 Agilent-021643 GIS Zebrafish Array ver1.1_custom layout [PROBE NAME version]

CITATIONS
24465396

