TITLE
A mesenchymal stromal cell gene signature for donor age

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Human aging is associated with loss of function and regenerative capacity. Human bone marrow derived mesenchymal stromal cells (hMSCs) are involved in tissue regeneration, evidenced by their capacity to differentiate into several lineages and therefore are considered the gold standard for cell-based regeneration therapy. Tissue maintenance and regeneration is dependent on stem cells and declines with age and aging is thought to influence therapeutic efficacy, therefore, more insight in the process of aging of hMSCs is of high interest. We, therefore, hypothesized that hMSCs might reflect signs of aging. In order to find markers for donor age, early passage hMSCs were isolated from bone marrow of 61 donors, with ages varying from 17-84, and clinical parameters, in vitro characteristics and microarray analysis were assessed. Although clinical parameters and in vitro performance did not yield reliable markers for aging since large donor variations were present, genome-wide microarray analysis resulted in a considerable list of genes correlating with human age. By comparing the transcriptional profile of aging in human with the one from rat, we discovered follistatin as a common marker for aging in both species. The gene signature presented here could be a useful tool for drug testing to rejuvenate hMSCs or for the selection of more potent, hMSCs for cell-based therapy. We used microaray gene expression profiling to find expressed genes that correlated with the donor age of bone-marrow derived mesenchymal stromal cells (hMSCs)

DESIGN
Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) were biopsied from bone marrow from 61 different donors aging from 17 - 89 years old. The genome wide expression profiles was assessed using Affymetrix microarrays. The expression of genes was correlated with the age of the donors.

PLATFORM
GPL571 [HG-U133A_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
22927939

