TITLE
An RNA-interacting protein network regulates pluripotency in mammalian primordial germ cells (Dazl native RNA-IP)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Primordial germ cells (PGCs) are the embryonic precursors to egg and sperm. When removed from the embryonic gonad, PGCs can give rise to embryonic germ cell lines (EGs), pluripotent stem cells that display most of the characteristics of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) including the ability to form teratomas and to contribute to chimera formation. In mice, EG cells can be derived between E8.5 up to E12.5 of embryonic development, at which point the PGCs undergo sexual differentiation and in the male transition into unipotent gonocytes. Dazl, a germ cell-specific RNA-binding protein, is specifically expressed in developing PGCs and is required for proper germ cell development. Dazl knockout mice are infertile, but the molecular mechanisms underlying this phenotype are still unknown. Here we demonstrate that Dazl localizes in granular structures in mammalian PGCs but not in ESCs. We demonstrate Dazl plays a central role in a large mRNA/protein interactive network that includes members of Fragile-X family RNA-binding proteins. We demonstrate that Dazl and Fxr1 play a central role in these granules and directly regulate the translation of specific core pluripotency factors, including Sox2 and Suz12. RNA species interacting specifically with Dazl in primordial germ cells were identified by RNA-IP microarray analysis. This dataset contains data from native RNA-IPs without UV-crosslinking.

DESIGN
Two independent native RNA-IP (anti-V5 and anti-GFP) experiments from in vitro derived primordial germ cells expressing Dazl-GFP-V5. Input Total RNA and mock IP using normal mouse IgG were used as controls. Control and IP-enriched RNA samples were analyzed by Agilent Mouse Whole Genome 4X44K one-color microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

