TITLE
Distinct gene expression profiles of viral- and non-viral associated Merkel cell carcinoma revealed by transcriptome analysis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is an aggressive cutaneous neuroendocrine tumor with high mortality rates. Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV), identified in the majority of MCC, may drive tumorigenesis via viral T antigens.   However, mechanisms underlying pathogenesis in MCPyV-negative MCC remain poorly understood. To nominate genes contributing to pathogenesis of MCPyV-negative MCC, we performed DNA microarray analysis on 30 MCCs. MCPyV status of MCCs was determined by PCR for viral DNA and RNA. 1593 probe-sets were differentially expressed between MCPyV-negative and -positive MCC, with significant differential expression defined as at least 2-fold change in either direction and p-value of ≤ 0.05. MCPyV-negative tumors showed decreased RB1 expression, whereas MCPyV-positive tumors were enriched for immune response genes. Validation studies included immunohistochemistry demonstration of decreased RB protein expression in MCPyV-negative tumors and increased peritumoral CD8+ T lymphocytes surrounding MCPyV-positive tumors. In conclusion, our data suggest that loss of RB1 expression may play an important role in tumorigenesis of MCPyV-negative MCC. Functional and clinical validation studies are needed to determine whether this tumor suppressor pathway represents an avenue for targeted therapy. We used microarrays to characterize global gene expression patterns related to Merkel cell polyomavirus status in Merkel cell carcinoma.  Furthermore, we compared Merkel cell carcinoma to less aggressive primary cutaneous carcinomas.

DESIGN
We utilized flash-frozen tumor tissue from primary Merkel cell carcinomas, metastatic Merkel cell carcinomas, primary cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas, and basal cell carcinomas. Merkel cell carcinoma cell lines, which represent a pure population of tumor cells, were also included. Merkel cell polyomavirus status was determined at the DNA and RNA level using multiple primers for viral T-antigen and capsid protein sequences. This Series represents two analyses - one with new Samples normalized together, and another with some of the new Samples re-normalized with Samples previously submitted under Series GSE13355.  The latter group contain 'renormalized' in the titles.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
23223137

