TITLE
Gene profiling of VP16-CREB transgenic mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Expression of VP16-CREB, a constitutively active form of CREB, in hippocampal neurons of the CA1 region lowers the threshold for eliciting the late, persistent phase of long-term potentiation (L-LTP) in the Schaffer collateral pathway. This VP16-CREB-mediated L-LTP differs from the conventional late phase of LTP in not being dependent on new transcription. This finding suggests that in the transgenic mice the mRNA transcript(s) encoding the protein(s) necessary for this form of L-LTP might already be present in CA1 neurons in the basal condition. We used high-density oligonucleotide arrays to identify the mRNAs differentially expressed in the hippocampus of transgenic and wild-type mice. Keywords: Genetic modification, time course

DESIGN
To identify the specific gene whose induction in hippocampal neurons correlated with the facilitated L-LTP phenotype, we harvested hippocampal mRNA at time points assessed in our physiological study and carried out a gene expression analysis using oligonucleotide microarrays. To obtain a sufficient quantity of poly(A)-RNA and reduce the effect of the biological variability of the sample, hippocampi from 6 to 10 mice matched for genotype and time of induction were pooled together in each sample. The final data set included genechips for animals on dox (gene Off) and for animals that were one, two, and five weeks after removal of dox (gene On). We also included samples from wild-type mice maintained under identical conditions and from transgenic mice that expressed VP16-CREB for three weeks before turning the transgene off again for two weeks with dox (Rev, gene Off). Since the isolation of mRNA from the whole hippocampus favors genes that are more broadly over-expressed in the hippocampus of transgenic mice and, therefore, may lead to an underestimation of the total complement of genes showing an altered expression in specific hippocampal subregions, we extended our comparison between transgenic and wild-type expression profiles using microdissected CA1 regions. We obtained two samples corresponding to VP16-CREB mice three weeks after induction and one sample corresponding to wild-type mice kept in the same conditions. These twelve mRNA samples were analyzed using Affymetrix genechips MG-U74v2 setA.

PLATFORM
GPL81 [MG_U74Av2] Affymetrix Murine Genome U74A Version 2 Array

CITATIONS
16202713

