TITLE
Expression data of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae 4074 under aerobic and anaerobic environment

ORGANISM
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae serovar 1 str. 4074

SUMMARY
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae is an important porcine respiratory pathogen causing great economic losses in the pig industry worldwide. Oxygen deprivation is a stress that A. pleuropneumoniae will encounter during both early infection and the later, persistent stage. To understand modulation of A. pleuropneumoniae gene expression in response to the stress caused by anaerobic conditions, gene expression profiles under anaerobic and aerobic conditions were compared in this study. The microarray results showed that 631 genes (27.7% of the total ORFs) were differentially expressed in anaerobic conditions. Many genes encoding proteins involved in glycolysis, carbon source uptake systems, pyruvate metabolism, fermentation and the electron respiration transport chain were up-regulated. These changes led to an increased amount of pyruvate, lactate, ethanol and acetate in the bacterial cells as confirmed by metabolite detection. Genes encoding proteins involved in cell surface structures, especially biofilm formation, peptidoglycan biosynthesis and lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis were up-regulated as well. Biofilm formation was significantly enhanced under anaerobic conditions. These results indicate that induction of central metabolism is important for basic survival of A. pleuropneumoniae after a shift to an anaerobic environment. Enhanced biofilm formation may contribute to the persistence of this pathogen in the damaged anaerobic host tissue and also in the early colonization stage. These discoveries give new insights into adaptation mechanisms of A. pleuropneumoniae in response to environmental stress.

DESIGN
Transcriptional profiles were analyzed using microarray to compare the gene expressions of A. pleuropneumoniae cultured under aerobic and anaerobic condition. The bacteria was cultured under aerobic condition to mid-log phase (3 hours) and then divided into two separate groups, one group was continually cultured under aerobic condition for 1 hour (OD600nm = 0.417 ± 0.008) and the other group was cultured under anaerobic condition for 1 hour (OD600nm = 0.333 ± 0.015). Three independent biological replicates were performed. The total RNA were extracted and hybridized with the whole genome microarray of A. pleuropneumoniae. The signal intensities were normalized and transformed into log2 values. The genes with P-value < 0.05 were selected as differentially expressed genes.

PLATFORM
GPL9691 Agilent-019883 Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae expression array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

