TITLE
Open Ocean and Coastal Strains of Marine Synechococcus display distinctly different Global Responses to DNA Damaging Agents

ORGANISM
Synechococcus sp. CC9311 ; Synechococcus sp. WH 8102

SUMMARY
We have looked at the transcriptional response of well characterised Synechococcus open ocean (WH8102) and coastal (CC9311) isolates to two DNA damaging agents, mitomycin C and ethidium bromide, using whole genome expression microarrays.  The coastal strain, which was able to grow on higher concentrations of both chemicals, showed differential regulation of a larger proportion of its genome following ‘toxic shock’ treatment with each agent. Many of the orthologous genes in these strains, including those encoding sensor kinases, showed different transcriptional responses, with the CC9311 genes more likely to show significant changes for each tested treatment. While the overall response of each strain was considerably different, there were distinct transcriptional responses common to both strains observed for each DNA damaging agent, linked to the mode of action of each chemical. In both CC9311 and WH8102 there was evidence of SOS response induction under mitomycin C treatment, with genes encoding recA, the lexA repressor and umuC significantly upregulated in this experiment but not under ethidium bromide treatment. Conversely, ethidium bromide treatment tended to result in upregulation of the DNA-directed RNA polymerase genes, not observed following mitomycin C treatment. Interestingly, a large number of genes residing on putative genomic island regions of each genome also showed significant upregulation under one or both chemical treatments.

DESIGN
In this series four conditions have been analyzed. These are 2 hour incubations (shock treatment) with ethidium bromide (EB, final conc 2ug/mL) and mitomycin C (MC, final conc 0.5 ug/mL) for Synechococcus sp. WH8102 and CC9311. For each slide, an experimental RNA sample was labeled with Cy3 or Cy5 and was hybridized with a reference RNA from a control sample (no addition of chemical agent) labeled with the other Cy dye. There are six slides per condition, each with at least two biological replicates and three technical replicates, including at least one flip-dye comparison. Each slide contains six replicate spots per gene.

PLATFORM
GPL15878 JCVI Synechococcus sp. CC9311 21k v1.0 [gene-centered version] GPL15879 JCVI Synechococcus sp. WH 8102 19K v2.0 [gene-centered version]

CITATIONS
23966990

