TITLE
Gene expression patterns and life cycle responses of toxicant exposed chironomids

ORGANISM
Chironomus riparius

SUMMARY
Cellular stress responses are frequently presumed to be more sensitive than traditional ecotoxicological life cycle endpoints such as survival and growth. Yet, the focus to reduce test duration and to generate more sensitive endpoints has caused transcriptomics studies to be performed at low doses during short exposures, separately and independently from traditional ecotoxicity tests, making comparisons with life cycle endpoints indirect. Therefore we aimed to directly compare the effects on growth, survival and gene expression of the non-biting midge Chironomus riparius. To this purpose, we analyzed simultaneously life cycle and transcriptomics responses of chironomid larvae exposed to four model toxicants. We observed that already at the lowest test concentrations many transcripts were significantly differentially expressed, while the life cycle endpoints of C. riparius were hardly affected. Analysis of the differentially expressed transcripts showed that at the lowest test concentrations substantial and biologically relevant cellular stress was induced and that many transcripts responded already maximally at these lowest test concentrations. The direct comparison between molecular en life cycle responses after fourteen days of exposure revealed that gene expression is more sensitive to toxicant exposure than life cycle endpoints, underlining the potential of transcriptomics for ecotoxicity testing and environmental risk assessment. Cellular stress responses are frequently presumed to be more sensitive than traditional ecotoxicological life cycle endpoints such as survival and growth. Yet, the focus to reduce test duration and to generate more sensitive endpoints has caused transcriptomics studies to be performed at low doses during short exposures, separately and independently from traditional ecotoxicity tests, making comparisons with life cycle endpoints indirect. Therefore we aimed to directly compare the effects on growth, survival and gene expression of the non-biting midge Chironomus riparius. To this purpose, we analyzed simultaneously life cycle and transcriptomics responses of chironomid larvae exposed to four model toxicants. We observed that already at the lowest test concentrations many transcripts were significantly differentially expressed, while the life cycle endpoints of C. riparius were hardly affected. Analysis of the differentially expressed transcripts showed that at the lowest test concentrations substantial and biologically relevant cellular stress was induced and that many transcripts responded already maximally at these lowest test concentrations. The direct comparison between molecular en life cycle responses after fourteen days of exposure revealed that gene expression is more sensitive to toxicant exposure than life cycle endpoints, underlining the potential of transcriptomics for ecotoxicity testing and environmental risk assessment.

DESIGN
Four 14-day Chironomus riparius sediment toxicity tests were conducted, one with each toxicant. The surviving larvae were individually flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. For each toxicant we analyzed the gene expression of larvae exposed to low, intermediate and high concentrations. We also included a control and a solvent control. For each treatment we analyzed 10 replicates  (individual larvae).

PLATFORM
GPL15918 Chironomus_riparius_Gene_Expression_microarray

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

