TITLE
The disparate twins: A comparative study of CXCR4 and CXCR7 in SDF-1α-induced gene expression, invasion and chemosensitivity of colon cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In colorectal cancer, increased expression of the CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) has been shown to provoke metastatic disease due to the interaction with its ligand stromal cell-derived factor 1 (SDF-1). Recently, a second SDF-1 receptor, CXCR7, was found to enhance tumor growth in solid tumors. Albeit signaling cascades via SDF-1/CXCR4 have been intensively studied, the significance of the SDF-1/CXCR7-induced intracellular communication triggering malignancy is still only marginally understood. In tumor tissue of 52 colorectal cancer (CRC) patients, we observed that expression of CXCR7 and CXCR4 increased with tumor stage, tumor size, and lymph node infiltration. Asking whether activation of CXCR4 or CXCR7 might result in a similar expression pattern, we performed microarray expression analyses using lentivirally CXCR4- and/or CXCR7-overexpressing SW480 colon cancer cell lines with and without stimulation by SDF-1α. Gene regulation via SDF-1α/CXCR4 and SDF-1α/CXCR7 was completely different and partly antidromic. Expressions of the differentially expressed genes AKR1C3, AXL, EGFR, IGFBP7, IL24, TNNC1, TRIP6 were confirmed by qPCR. Differentially regulated genes were assigned by GO to migration and lipid metabolic processes. Furthermore, using the in silico gene set enrichment analysis we showed for the first time that expressions of miR-217 and miR-218 were increased in CXCR4 and reduced in CXCR7 cells after stimulation with SDF-1α. As expected, their putative target mRNAs were inversely expressed. Functional assays exerted that exposure to SDF-1α resulted in strongly amplified invasiveness and chemosensitivity of CXCR4-expressing cells. CXCR7 overexpression led to reduced invasiveness which could only be marginally increased by SDF-1α. The CXCR4 antagonist plerixafor significantly reduced invasiveness of CXCR4-overexpressing cells only. Similarly, compared to control cells, CXCR4 cells showed increased sensitivity against 5-FU, while CXCR7 cells were more chemoresistant. These opposing results for CXCR4- or CXCR7-overexpressing colon carcinoma cells demand an unexpected attention in the clinical application of chemokine receptor antagonists like Plerixafor.

DESIGN
24 samples

