TITLE
Expression data from 58 Synovial Sarcomas

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Synovial sarcoma (SS) occur in children as well as in adults, although metastatic events are much more common in the latter. Whereas the importance of the t(X;18) translocation in SS oncogenesis is well established, the genetic basis of SS metastasis is still poorly understood. We recently reported expression (CINSARC) and genomic (GI) prognostic signatures related to chromosome integrity in sarcomas and gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs). Here we investigate whether these signatures can also predict outcomes in SS. Methods: One hundred primary untreated SS were selected for expression and genomic profiling in a training/validation approach. Results: CINSARC and GI have strong, independent and validated prognostic values (p < 0.0001). Comparing expression profiles of tumors with or without metastasis, 14 genes common with the CINSARC signature were identified and the two top-ranked genes, KIF14 and CDCA2, were validated as prognostic markers in an independent cohort. Comparing genomic profiles of adult vs. pediatric SS, we show that metastasis is associated with genome complexity in both situations and that the adult genome is more frequently rearranged. Accordingly, pediatric patients with an even genomic profile do not develop metastasis. Conclusions: Metastasis development in SS is strongly associated with chromosome complexity, and CINSARC and GI are validated independent prognostic factors. The differences in metastasis frequency between adults and children are associated with genome instability, which is much more frequent in adults. GI is potentially the best overall biomarker, and clearly the most clinically relevant, considering that genome profiling from formalin fixed samples is already used in pathology.

DESIGN
58 Synovial Sarcomas hybridized to Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
23319690 , 23664094

