TITLE
Comparative transcriptomic analysis of acute host responses during 2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza infection in mouse, macaque, and swine (macaque dataset)

ORGANISM
Macaca fascicularis

SUMMARY
Background: The 2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza virus emerged in swine and quickly became a major global health threat. In mouse, non-human primate, and swine infection models, the pH1N1 virus efficiently replicates in the lung and induces pro-inflammatory host responses; however, whether similar or different cellular pathways were impacted by pH1N1 virus across independent infection models remains to be further defined. To address this, we have performed a comparative transcriptomic analysis of acute host responses to a single pH1N1 influenza virus, A/California/04/2009 (CA04), in the lung of mice, macaques and swine. Results: Despite similarities in the clinical course, we observed differences in inflammatory molecules elicited, and the kinetics of their gene expression changes across all three species. The retinoid X receptor (RXR) signaling pathway controlling pro-inflammatory and metabolic processes was differentially regulated during infection in each species, though the heterodimeric RXR partner, pathway associated signaling molecules, and gene expression patterns differed in each species. Conclusions: By comparing transcriptional changes in the context of clinical and virological measures, we identified differences in the host transcriptional response to pH1N1 virus across independent models of acute infection. Antiviral resistance and the emergence of new influenza viruses have placed more focus on developing drugs that target the immune system. Underlying overt clinical disease are molecular events that suggest therapeutic targets identified in one host may not be appropriate in another.

DESIGN
The goal of this experiment was to use global gene expression profiling to understand non-human primate lung cellular responses to pandemic H1N1 influenza A/California/04/2009 virus infection. Four- to fifteen-year-old cynomologous macaques were infected with CA04 virus (n = 4) under anesthesia through a combination of intratracheal (4 ml), intranasal (0.5 ml per nostril), conjunctival (0.5 ml per eyelid) and oral (1 ml) routes with a suspension containing 10^6 TCID50/ml (total infectious dose was 7x10^6 TCID50). Animals were euthanized on 1 and 6 days post-inoculation (n = 2 per time point), and total RNA was extracted from lung samples and analyzed by microarray. Pooled RNA from lungs of uninfected animals served as the reference.

PLATFORM
GPL14569 Agilent-015421 Rhesus Macaque Gene Expression Microarray (Probe Name Version)

CITATIONS
23153050

