TITLE
Signaling pathways of HPAIV

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses (HPAIV) induce severe inflammation in poultry and men. There is still an ongoing threat that these viruses may acquire the capability to freely spread as novel pandemic virus strains that may cause major morbidity and mortality. One characteristic of HPAIV infections is the induction of a cytokine burst that strongly contributes to viral pathogenicity. It has been suggested, that this cytokine overexpression is an intrinsic feature of infected cells and involves hyperinduction of p38 mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK). Here we investigate the role of MAPK p38 signaling in the antiviral response against HPAIV in mice as well as in endothelial cells, the latter a primary source for cytokines during systemic infections. Global gene expression profiling of HPAIV infected endothelial cells in the presence of the MAP kinase p38-specific inhibitor SB202190 revealed, that inhibition of MAPK p38 leads to reduced expression of interferon (IFN) and other cytokines after A/Thailand/1(KAN-1)/2004 (H5N1) and A/FPV/Bratislava/79 (H7N7) infection. Furthermore, the expression of interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) after treatment with IFN or conditioned media from HPAIV infected cells was decreased when the target cells were preincubated with SB202190. Finally, promoter analysis confirmed a direct impact of p38 MAPK on the IFN-enhanceosome and ISG-promoter activity. In vivo inhibition of MAP kinase p38 greatly diminishes virus induced cytokine expression concomitant with reduced viral titers, thereby protecting mice from lethal infection. These observations show, that MAPK p38 acts on two levels of the antiviral IFN response: Initially the kinase regulates IFN induction and at a later stage MAPK p38 controls IFN signaling and thereby expression of IFN-stimulated genes. Thus, inhibition of MAP kinase p38 may be an antiviral strategy that significantly protects mice from lethal influenza via suppression of overshooting cytokine expression.

DESIGN
HUVEC were infected with FPV in the presence or absence of a p38 MAP kinase inhibitor

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
24189062

