TITLE
Outer cell surface components essential for Fe(III) oxide reduction in Geobacter metallireducens

ORGANISM
Geobacter metallireducens GS-15

SUMMARY
The ability of Geobacter species to readily donate electrons to extracellular electron acceptors makes the study of their physiology not only important for the understanding of environmental processes, but also for industrial applications such as bioelectronics and electrosynthesis. Studies in G. sulfurreducens have shown that outer surface components, such as c-type cytochromes and conductive type IV pili play an important role in direct electron transfer to extracellular electron acceptors such as Fe(III) oxides and electrodes. However, many of these thoroughly studied outer surface components, including c-type cytochromes, are not well conserved among Geobacter species. In order to better understand which components are involved in extracellular electron transfer in Geobacter species other than G. sulfurreducens, studies were conducted with its close relative G. metallireducens. Whole-genome microarray analysis revealed that 23 of the 91 putative c-type cytochromes encoded in the G. metallireducens genome were upregulated at least 2-fold in cells grown with Fe(III) oxide compared to cells in which Fe(III) citrate was provided as the terminal electron acceptor. Protein identification with liquid-chromatography/mass spectrometry detected 6 c-type cytochromes that were more abundant in the outer surface cell fraction of cells that were grown with Fe(III) oxide as the terminal electron acceptor compared to cells grown on Fe(III) citrate.  22 genes encoding c-type cytochromes were chosen for gene deletion. Deletion of 6 genes encoding for c-type cytochromes, a gene encoding for a lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis-associated protein, and a gene encoding for a NHL- repeat containing protein inhibited growth when Fe(III) oxide was provided as the electron acceptor. This study suggests that there are different roads for extracellular electron transfer in Geobacteraceae since homologous c-type cytochromes have different functions from one species to the other, and novel components not previously found to be essential for extracellular electron transfer were identified.

DESIGN
An eight-chip study using total RNA recovered from four separate cultures of Geobacter metallireducens GS-15 grown with acetate (10mM)-Fe(III) oxide (100 mmol l-1) (experimental condition) or with acetate (10 mM)-Fe(III) citrate (55mM) (control condition) during exponential growth. Each chip measures the expression level of 3,627 genes from Geobacter metallireducens GS-15 with nine 45-60-mer probe pairs (PM/MM) per gene, with three-fold technical redundancy.

