TITLE
Scheck-3U24NS043571-01S1

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Meningiomas are typically considered a benign tumor that can be cured by complete surgical resection; however, a percentage of patients have recurrent disease, even after apparently complete resections.  These patients require additional surgeries, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or a combination of all three.  The ability to recognize these patients prior to recurrence would promote earlier use of adjuvant therapy, thus improving overall patient outcome.  Unfortunately, identification of meningiomas with this more aggressive phenotype is difficult, and standard histopathological techniques rarely suffice.  The identification of genetic and molecular parameters that can help to define these more aggressive tumors would improve prognostication and treatment planning for patients with meningiomas. 1. Establish gene profiles for benign (grade 1) and aggressive (grades 2 and 3) meningiomas. 2. Determine if there are particular expression profiles that can help differentiate between benign and aggressive meningiomas. 3. Determine if there is/are specific gene(s) whose expression is/are altered in benign vs aggressive tumors. 4. Determine if there is a correlation between specific genetic abnormalities in these tumors (as analyzed by fluorescent in situ hybridization; FISH) and gene expression profiles. Our overall hypothesis is that there are molecular and biochemical changes that can be used to identify meningiomas that will have a more aggressive clinical course. Specific Aims 1 and 2: RNA from flash frozen or RNA-later preserved tissue (from all three grades of meningiomas) has been used for RNA isolation using standard protocols.  RNA quantity has been determined using a RiboGreen RNA quantitation Kit (Molecular Probes), and RNA quality has been demonstrated using standard formaldehyde gels.  These samples will be sent to the NINDS/NIMH microarray consortium for Affymetrix microarray analyses.  Data analysis will be done using GeneSpring software (Silicon Genetics, Inc.) with assistance from consortium personnel. Specific Aim 3: Differentially expressed genes identified through microarray analyses will be analyzed using quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).  Real time qRT-PCR is a standard technique used in our laboratory for gene expression analysis. Specific Aim 4: FISH analyses of paraffin-embedded tissue has been completed for 77 tumors.  We have frozen tissue from a number of these patients.  RNA from these samples will be used for microarray analyses (Specific Aims 1-3).  The results of Speicifc Aims 1 and 2 will affect how we perform our correlation analyses.  This will be done with the assistance of contracted statistical personnel. Keywords: other

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

