TITLE
Copper-regulated genes of Bradyrhizobium japonicum

ORGANISM
Bradyrhizobium japonicum

SUMMARY
Copper-limiting growth conditions were thought to cause an induction of genes possibly involved in copper uptake and sorting. This rationale in mind, we performed microarray analyses on B. japonicum cells grown in three variations of the BVM minimal medium. Variant 1 contained 2 μM CuSO4 (copper excess). Variant 2 was prepared in HCl-treated glassware without any copper added (copper starvation). The residual copper concentration in this copper-starvation medium was analyzed by GF-AAS and determined to be 5 nM. Variant 3 (extreme copper limitation) was prepared like variant 2 but with the addition of 10 μM BCS and 1 mM ascorbic acid where BCS chelates Cu(I) selectively, and ascorbic acid reduces any Cu(II) to Cu(I). Changes in the transcription profiles were recorded by the pairwise comparison of cells grown in variant 2 vs. 1, and variant 3 vs. 2. Only a small set of genes were differentially up- or down-regulated when copper-starved cells were compared with cells grown in copper excess. Most notably, five genes located adjacent to each other on the B. japonicum genome displayed an increased expression: bll4882 to bll4878. The five genes were named pcuA, pcuB, pcuC, pcuD, and pcuE (mnemonic of proteins for Cu trafficking). The genes with decreased expression are either of unknown function or – not surprisingly – play a role in copper resistance. Extreme copper limitation (variant 3 vs. 2) did not further enhance the expression of the five pcu genes. Instead, another cluster of adjacent genes was strongly up-regulated: bll0889 to bll0883, which code for unidentified transport functions. Incidentally, the list also includes the copper chaperone ScoI. Taken together, copper-limiting growth conditions have led to the de-repression of genes potentially involved in copper acquisition.

DESIGN
Microarray-based transcriptome analysis of B. japonicum 110spc4 wild-type cells  grown under normal, copper-limiting and copper excess conditions

PLATFORM
GPL3401 Affymetrix custom Bradyrhizobium japonicum strain USDA 110 19K array

CITATIONS
23012364

