TITLE
Transcriptional analysis of the response of Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus to different H2 partial pressures

ORGANISM
Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus

SUMMARY
Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus is an extremely thermophilic, gram-positive anaerobe which ferments a broad range of substrates to mainly acetate, CO2, and hydrogen gas (H2). Its high hydrogen-producing capacity make this bacterium an attractive candidate for microbial biohydrogen production. However, increased H2 levels tend to inhibit hydrogen formation and leads to the formation of other reduced end products like lactate and ethanol.   To investigate the organism’s strategy for dealing with elevated H2 levels and to identify alternative pathways involved in the disposal of the reducing equivalents, the effect of the hydrogen partial pressure (PH2) on fermentation performance was studied. For this purpose cultures were grown under high and low PH2 in a glucose limited chemostat setup.   Transcriptome analysis revealed the up-regulation of genes involved in the disposal of reducing equivalents under high PH2, like lactate dehydrogenase and alcohol dehydrogenase as well as the NADH-dependent and ferredoxin-dependent hydrogenases. These findings were in line with the observed shift in fermentation profiles from acetate production under low PH2 to a mixed production of acetate, lactate and ethanol under high PH2. In addition, differential transcription was observed for genes involved in carbon metabolism, fatty acid biosynthesis and several transport systems. The presented transcription data provides experimental evidence for the involvement of the redox sensing Rex protein in gene regulation under high PH2 cultivation conditions.   Overall, these findings indicate that the PH2 dependent changes in the fermentation pattern of C. saccharolyticus are, in addition to the known regulation at the enzyme/metabolite level, also regulated at the transcription level.

DESIGN
Two conditions: low H2 partial pressure and high H2 partial pressure, both at steady state growth were harvested for a dye-flip microarray experimental design. Biological replicates were harvested for both conditions and combined prior to cDNA synthesis. Both conditions were labeled with cy3 and cy5 dyes allowing for a technical replicate of hybridization in addition to the biological replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL6681 NCSU_Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus_3K array_version 1

CITATIONS
Abraham A.M. Bielen, Marcel R.A. Verhaart, Amy L. VanFossen, Sara E. Blumer-Schuette, Alfons J.M. Stams, John van der Oost, Robert M. Kelly, Serve W.M. Kengen, A thermophile under pressure: Transcriptional analysis of the response of Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus to different H2 partial pressures, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, Volume 38, Issue 4, 12 February 2013, Pages 1837-1849, ISSN 0360-3199, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.11.082

