TITLE
Transcriptome Analysis of Exercise Ancestry

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Transcriptome analysis of gastrocnemius muscle RNA samples from exercise and sedentary ancestries Early life and pre-conception environmental stimuli can affect adult health-related phenotypes. Exercise training is an environmental stimulus affecting many systems throughout the body and appears to alter offspring phenotypes. The aim of this study was to examine the influence of parental exercise training, or “exercise ancestry,” on morphological and metabolic phenotypes in multiple generations of mouse offspring. F0 C57BL/6 mice were exposed to voluntary exercise or sedentary lifestyle and bred with like-exposed mates to produce an F1 generation. F1 mice of both ancestries were sedentary and sacrificed at 8 wk or bred with littermates to produce an F2 generation, which was also sedentary and sacrificed at 8 wk. Small, but broad generation- and sex-specific effects of exercise ancestry were observed for body mass, fat and muscle mass, serum insulin, glucose tolerance, and muscle gene expression. F1 EX females were heavier than F1 SED females, but F1 SED females had higher absolute tibialis anterior and omental fat masses. Serum insulin was lower in F1 SED females compared to F1 EX females. F2 EX females had impaired glucose tolerance compared to F2 SED females. Analysis of skeletal muscle mRNA levels revealed several generation- and sex-specific differences in mRNA levels for multiple genes, especially those related to metabolic genes (e.g., F1 EX males had lower mRNA levels of Hk2, Ppard, Ppargc1α, Adipoq, and Scd1 than F1 SED males). These results provide preliminary evidence that parental exercise training can influence health-related phenotypes in mouse offspring.

DESIGN
We analyzed RNA from 10 males each from exercise and sedentary ancestries over 2 generations of offspring (F1 and F2)

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
23771910

