TITLE
Danio rerio and Pomacentrus moluccensis: comparative genomic hybridisation and early gene response to heat stress

ORGANISM
Danio rerio ; Pomacentrus moluccensis

SUMMARY
Microarray technology provides a powerful tool for gene discovery studies, but the development of microarrays for individual species can be expensive and time-consuming. In this study, we test the suitability of a Danio rerio oligonucleotide microarray for application in a species with few genomic resources, the coral reef fish Pomacentrus moluccensis. Coral reef fishes are expected to experience rising sea surface temperatures due to climate change. How well tropical reef fish species will respond to these increased temperatures and which genes are important for resistance and adaptation to elevated temperatures is not known. Microarray technology may help identify candidate genes for thermal stress resistance in coral reef fishes. Results from a comparative genomic DNA hybridisation experiment and direct sequence comparisons indicate that for most genes there is significant sequence similarity between P. moluccensis and D. rerio, suggesting that the D. rerio array is applicable to P. moluccensis. Heterologous microarray experiments on heat-stressed P. moluccensis identified changes in transcript abundance at 120 gene loci, with many genes involved in protein processing, transcription, and cell growth. Changes in transcript abundance for a selection of candidate genes were confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR. We have demonstrated that heterologous microarrays can be successfully employed to study non-model organisms. Such a strategy thus greatly enhances the applicability of microarray technology to the field of environmental and functional genomics and will be useful for investigating the molecular basis of thermal adaptation in coral reef fishes. Keywords: stress response, comparative genomic hybridization (CGH)

DESIGN
Common reference design [Stress response_P. moluccensis]: four individual treatment fish (heat-stressed) are contrasted in four microarray hybridisations against a pooled control consisting of four fish kept at ambient temperature. All eight fish employed in this analysis were wild-captured and are biological replicates. The experiment included dye-swap, i.e. stressed fish were labelled red in two hybridisations and green in the other two hybridisations. Common reference design [CGH_P. moluccensis and D. rerio]: four individual P. moluccensis gDNA samples are contrasted in four microarray hybridisations against a pooled gDNA sample consisting of three D. rerio. The experiment included dye-swaps.

PLATFORM
GPL3365 Compugen Zebrafish 16K

CITATIONS
17402988

