TITLE
Gene expression in human subcutaneous adipose tissue after administration of Gastric Insulinotropic Peptide (GIP)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The intention of this clinical study was to investigate the effect of GIP administration for 240 min on gene expression in human subcutaneous adipose tissue. Three conditions have been tersted: 1. Sole infusion of GIP or NaCl as control; 2. GIP or NaCl administration under euglycemic-hyperinsulinemic clamp conditions; 3. GIP or NaCl administration under hyperglycemic-hyperinsulinemic clamp conditions to mimic the postprandial state.

DESIGN
In each participant a complete physical examination and evaluation of medical history was performed, including an oral glucose tolerance test (oGTT) with 75 g glucose after overnight fast to ensure the metabolic state. Standard fasting laboratory and clinical chemistry evaluations were done. Synthetic human GIP (1-42) was dissolved in saline (0.9% NaCl-solution) under sterile conditions. All studies were done in the morning in the overnight fasted state ( > 10h since last meal). The effect of GIP administration on gene expression in subcutaneous adipose tissue was studied under 3 different conditions in a single blind design. Either the participants received only a GIP- or a saline- infusion (0.9% NaCl-isotonic solution, Fresenius, Germany) for 240 min. At different investigation days participants underwent euglycemic (EU)- and hyperglycemic (HC), hyperinsulinemic clamps combined with GIP- or placebo-infusions for 240 min at different examination days in a randomized, single-blind, crossover design. The capillary glucose concentration was 80mg/dl during EU-clamp and 140mg/dl during HC-clamp. The following numbers of treatments were performed: EU with GIP-infusion (N=9); EU with NaCl-infusion (N=9); HC with GIP-infusion (N=8), HC with NaCl-infusion (N=8); sole GIP-infusion (N=11) and sole placebo-infusion (N=11). Between examination days an intermission time of at least 7 days was maintained.

PLATFORM
GPL6848 Agilent-012391 Whole Human Genome Oligo Microarray G4112A (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

