TITLE
Role of a GntR-family response regulator LbrA in Listeria monocytogenes biofilm formation

ORGANISM
Listeria monocytogenes

SUMMARY
The formation of Listeria monocytogenes biofilms contributes to persistent contamination in food processing facilities. A microarray comparison of L. monocytogenes between the transcriptome of the strong biofilm forming strain (Bfms) Scott A and the weak biofilm forming (Bfmw) strain F2365 was conducted to identify genes potentially involved in biofilm formation.  Among 951 genes with significant difference in expression between the two strains, a GntR-family response regulator encoding gene (LMOf2365_0414), designated lbrA, was found to be highly expressed in Scott A relative to F2365. A Scott A lbrA-deletion mutant, designated AW3, formed biofilm to a much lesser extent as compared to the parent strain by a rapid attachment assay and scanning electron microscopy. Complementation with lbrA from Scott A restored the Bfms phenotype in the AW3 derivative.  A second microarray assessment using the lbrA deletion mutant AW3 and the wild type Scott A revealed a total of 304 genes with expression significantly different between the two strains, indicating the potential regulatory role of LbrA in L. monocytogenes. A cloned copy of Scott A lbrA was unable to confer enhanced biofilm forming potential in F2365, suggesting that additional factors contributed to weak biofilm formation by F2365. Findings from the study may lead to new strategies to modulate biofilm formation.

DESIGN
Two comparisons were performed between 1) strong biofilm former Listeria monocytogenes strain ScottA versus weak biofilm former Listeria monocytogenes strain F2365; 2) Listeria monocytogenes ScottA LbrA deletion mutant strain versus Listeria monocytogenes ScottA. Four replicates were loaded for the first comparison and two replicates were loaded for the second comparison.

PLATFORM
GPL5854 JCVI PFGRC Listeria monocytogenes 21K v3 array designed primarily based on strain 4b F2365

CITATIONS
23894658

