TITLE
A cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) specific gene signature in high grade serous ovarian cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Ovarian cancer is the most lethal malignancy in the United States. In the year 2012, there will be an estimated 22,280 new cases and 15,500 deaths from ovarian cancer in the country (Siegel et al., 2012). While studies on ovarian cancer pathogenesis were mainly focused on the epithelial component of the tumor, understanding in the role of cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in ovarian cancer progression is limited. We hypothesized that comparing the gene expression profiles of different components from laser capture microdissected ovarian tissue will allow us to identify an ovarian CAFs specific gene signature which accounts for the supportive role of CAFs in ovarian cancer progression. In this study, gene expression profiling was completed for 31 cancer stroma samples and 32 samples of epithelial component from high grade serous ovarian cancer patients. 8 microdissected normal ovarian stroma and 6 normal human ovarian surface epithelium (HOSE) samples were also included in the study. By comparing the expression data from cancer stroma against that from normal stroma, cancer cells and HOSE, we identified a set of differential expressed genes in ovarian CAFs which showed correlation with cancer patient survival. Further study on these genes can reveal their roles in ovarian cancer progression and pathogenesis. Ultimately, ovarian CAFs specified genes identified in this study may aid in the classification and enhancement of patient outcome.

DESIGN
Transcriptome profiling analyses were performed on 31 laser microdissected cancer associated stroma samples, 32 epithelial tumor samples from high grade serous ovarian cancer patients, 8 microdissected normal ovarian stroma samples and 6 ovarian surface epthelium (HOSE) samples using the Affymetrix human genome U133 Plus 2.0 microarray.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
23824740

