TITLE
Expression profiling of various colony phenotypes of wild Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
Transcriptome comparison of cells from 4 and 7 day-old microcolonies of wild Saccharomyces cerevisiae BR-F strain, 4 and 7 day-old microcolonies of feral BR-RF strain and 4- and 7 day-old microcolonies of domesticated BR-S strain. All colonies grown on solid complex media with glycerol as carbon source. The aim of the study was to identify genes required for fluffy (structured) colony formation as well as the genes specific for certain phenotypic variant. BR-F is wild strain isolated from natural habitat and forms structured colonies when grown on media with non-fermentable carbon source. BR-S strain arose by phenotypic switch from the original wild BR-F strain during the cultivation of BR-F strain under rich and favourable conditions (process of so-called domestication), forms smooth colonies. BR-RF strain is derived from the domesticated BR-S strain under adverse conditions and restores the formation of structured colonies and other properties of original wild BR-F strain.

DESIGN
Comparison of transcriptomes of cells from BR-F colonies vs cells from BR-RF colonies (see samples BR-FxBR-RF...), comparison of transcriptomes of cells from BR-F colonies vs cells from BR-S colonies (see samples BR-FxBR-S...) and comparison of transcriptomes of cells from BR-RF colonies vs cells from BR-S colonies (see samples BR-RFxBR-S...). Comparison of each couple performed with 4 day-old colonies and with 7 day-old colonies. 2 biological replicates for each time point from total 3 technical replicates (for first biological replicate see ...rep1, ...rep2 files, second biological replicate ...rep3 file). Dye-swap was performed between first two replicates (...rep1, ...rep2). In total six samples for each couple. Spotted ORFs microarray slides contain double genome of S. cerevisiae.

PLATFORM
GPL3458 University Health Network Yeast 6.4K Array (Y6.4K)

CITATIONS
24533484

