TITLE
Differential transcript isoform usage pre- and post-zygotic genome activation in zebrafish

ORGANISM
Danio rerio

SUMMARY
Zebrafish embryos are transcriptional silent until activation of the zygotic genome during the 10th cell cycle. Onset of transcription is followed by cellular and morphological changes involving cell speciation and gastrulation. Previous genome-wide surveys of transcriptional changes only assessed gene expression levels; however, recent studies have shown the necessity to map isoform-specific transcriptional changes. Here we perform isoform discovery and quantification on transcriptome sequences from before and after zebrafish zygotic genome activation (ZGA). We identify novel isoforms and isoform switches during ZGA for genes related to cell adhesion, pluripotency and DNA methylation. Isoform switching events include alternative splicing and changes in transcriptional start sites and in 3’ untranslated regions. New isoforms are identified even for well-characterized genes such as pou5f1, sall4 and dnmt1. Genes involved in cell-cell interactions such as f11r and magi1 display isoform switches with alterations of coding sequences. We also detect over 1000 transcripts that acquire a longer 3’ terminal exon when transcribed zygotically relative to the maternal transcript counterparts. ChIP-seq data mapped onto skipped exon events reveals a correlation between histone H3K36trimethylation peaks and the skipped exons, suggesting epigenetic marks being part of alternative splicing regulation. The novel isoforms and isoform switches reported here include regulators of the transcriptional, cellular and morphological changes taking place around ZGA. Our data display an array of isoform-related functional changes and represent a valuable resource complementary to existing early embryo transcriptomes.

DESIGN
Examination H3K36me3 in zebrafish whole embryos at the Post-MBT stage

PLATFORM
GPL15583 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Danio rerio)

CITATIONS
23676078

