TITLE
Erbb2 regulates inflammation and proliferation in the skin after ultraviolet irradiation.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Exposure to ultraviolet (UV) irradiation is the major cause of nonmelanoma skin cancer, the most common form of cancer in the United States. UV irradiation has a variety of effects on the skin associated with carcinogenesis, including DNA damage and effects on signal transduction. The alterations in signaling caused by UV regulate inflammation, cell proliferation, and apoptosis. UV also activates the orphan receptor tyrosine kinase and proto-oncogene Erbb2 (HER2/neu). In this study, we demonstrate that the UV-induced activation of Erbb2 regulates the response of the skin to UV. Inhibition or knockdown of Erbb2 before UV irradiation suppressed cell proliferation, cell survival, and inflammation after UV. In addition, Erbb2 was necessary for the UV-induced expression of numerous proinflammatory genes that are regulated by the transcription factors nuclear factor-kappaB and Comp1, including interleukin-1beta, prostaglandin-endoperoxidase synthase 2 (Cyclooxygenase-2), and multiple chemokines. These results reveal the influence of Erbb2 on the UV response and suggest a role for Erbb2 in UV-induced pathologies such as skin cancer. Keywords: time course, ultraviolet irradiation, UV, erbB2, mouse skin

DESIGN
The dorsal skin of adult female CD-1 mice was clipped one day before treatment and shaved on the day of treatment.  DMSO or 4 mg AG825 dissolved in DMSO was applied topically to the shaved back of the mice 2 h prior to exposure to 10 kJ/m^2 UV or sham irradiation.  The UV dose was approximately 30% UVA, 70% UVB and < 1% UVC, with a total output of 470 μW/cm^2.  Flash frozen skin was removed and total RNA expracted with TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) and further purified with an RNeasy kit (Qiagen).  Amplification, reverse-transcription, biotinylation, and hybridization were all carried out under standard conditions and procedures recommended by the manufacturer.

PLATFORM
GPL339 [MOE430A] Affymetrix Mouse Expression 430A Array

CITATIONS
17003495

