TITLE
DNA Methylation Changes and Childhood Asthma in the Inner City [gene expression]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background:  Epigenetic marks, like asthma, are heritable. They are influenced by the environment, direct the maturation of T cellslymphocytes, and have been shown to enhance the development of allergic airways disease in mice.  Thus, we hypothesized that epigenetic marks are associated with allergic asthma in inner-city children.  Methods:  We compared methylation patterns and gene expression in inner-city children with persistent atopic asthma versus healthy controls, using DNA and RNA from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from inner city children aged 6-12 years with persistent atopic asthma children and healthy controls.     Results were externally validated with the GABRIELA study population.    Results:  Comparing asthmatics (N=97) to controls (N=97), we identified 81 regions that were differentially methylated.  Several immune genes were hypomethylated in asthmatics, including IL-13, RUNX3, and a number of specific genes relevant to natural killer cells (KIR2DL4, KIR2DL3, KIR3DL1, and KLRD1) and T cells lymphocytes (TIGIT).   14 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were associated with the serum IgE concentration of IgE, including RUNX3.  These results were internally and externally validated with a global methylation assessment using a different methodology in our inner-city cohort and an independent European cohort (GABRIELA).  Hypo- and hypermethylated genes tended to be associated with increased and decreased gene expression, respectively (P < 0.6x10-11 for asthma and ; P < 0.01 for IgE).  To further explore the relationship between methylation and gene expression, we created a matrix of genomic changes in methylation versus transcriptional changes (methyl eQTL) for asthma, and identified cis- and trans-regulated genes whose expression was related to asthma asthma-associated methylation marks.

DESIGN
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from 97 atopic asthmatic and 97 nonatopic nonasthmatic children

