TITLE
Common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) PvTIFY orchestrates global changes in transcript profile response to phosphorus deficiency

ORGANISM
Phaseolus vulgaris

SUMMARY
TIFY is a large plant-specific transcription factor gene family. A subgroup of TIFY genes named JAZ (Jasmonate-ZIM domain) has been identified as repressors of jasmonate (JA)-regulated transcription in Arabidopsis and other plants. JA signaling is involved in many aspects of plant growth/development and in the defense responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. Here we identified the TIFY genes (designated as PvTIFY) from the legume common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) and functionally characterized PvTIFY10C as a transcriptional regulator. Twenty-three genes from the PvTIFY gene family were identified through whole genome sequence analysis. Most of these were induced upon methyl-JA elicitation. We selected PvTIFY10C as a representative JA-responsive PvTIFY gene for further functional analysis. Transcriptome analysis via microarray hybridization using the designed Bean Custom Array 90K was performed in transgenic roots of composite plants with modulated -RNAi-silencing or over-expression- PvTIFY10C gene expression. Data were interpreted using Mapman adapted to common bean. Microarray differential gene expression data were validated by real-time qRT-PCR expression analysis. Comparative global gene expression analysis revealed opposite regulatory changes in processes such as RNA and protein regulation, stress response and metabolism in silenced vs. over-expressing roots. These data point to transcript reprogramming -mainly repression- orchestrated by PvTIFY10C. In addition we found that several PvTIFY genes as well as genes from the JA biosynthetic pathway responded to P-deficiency. Relevant P-responsive genes that participate in carbon metabolic pathways, cell wall synthesis, lipid metabolism, transport, DNA, RNA and protein regulation, signaling, were oppositely-regulated in control vs. PvTIFY10C silenced roots. These data indicate that PvTIFY10C regulates, directly or indirectly, gene expression of some P-responsive genes something that could be mediated by JA-signaling.

DESIGN
Our work contributed to the functional characterization of PvTIFY transcriptional regulators in common bean, an agronomically important legume. Members from the large PvTIFY gene family are important global transcriptional regulators that could participate as repressors of the JA signaling pathway. In addition we propose that the JA-signaling pathway that involves PvTIFY genes might play a role in regulating the plant response / adaptation to P-starvation.

PLATFORM
GPL15488 IBBA/CCG_Common bean_90K_v1.0 [condensed]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

