TITLE
H1N1 influenza A/New Caledonia/20/1999 time series in monocyte-derived dendritic cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Genome-wide gene expression patterns were measured in human monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DCs)  infected in vitro with seasonal H1N1 influenza A/New Caledonia/20/1999. To provide a mechanistic  explanation for the timing of gene expression changes over the first 12 hours post-infection, we developed a  statistically rigorous enrichment approach integrating genome-wide expression kinetics and time-dependent  promoter analysis. Our approach, TI me-Dependent Activity Linker (TIDAL), generates a regulatory network  that connects transcription factors associated with each temporal phase of the response into a coherent linked  cascade. TIDAL infers 12 transcription factors and 32 regulatory connections that drive the antiviral response to  influenza. To demonstrate the generality of this approach, TIDAL was also used to generate a network for the  DC response to measles infection.

DESIGN
Monocyte-derived DCs were obtained from healthy human blood donors following a standard protocol. The recent seasonal H1N1 influenza virus A/New  Caledonia/20/1999 (NC) virus was titrated by immunofluorescence 18 hours after infection of MDCK cell plates using monoclonal antibodies specific for Influenza-NP protein generated by the Mount Sinai Hybridoma Core Facility followed by addition of anti-mouse IgG-FITC and  visualization using fluorescent microscopy. For infection of naive DCs, NC stocks were appropriately  diluted in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) and added directly into pelleted DCs at a  multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1 After incubation for 40 minutes at 37 ◦C, fresh DC growth  medium (without GMCSF and IL-4) was added back to the infected cells (1 106 cells/ml) for the  remainder of the infection. The reaction was stopped at 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12 hours after infection by  fixing the cells with RNAprotect Cell Reagent (Qiagen, Duesseldorf Germany). Naive non-infected DCs  underwent the same experimental procedure as infected DCs in the absence of virus to ensure that  mechanical manipulations could not be responsible for differences in experimental readouts. All time  points and controls were performed in triplicates. Cells were homogenized by using QIAshredder microcentrifuge spin-columns (Qiagen,  Duesseldorf Germany) and RNA was isolated from cells using Qiagen Micro RNeasy plus kit following the  manufactures protocol (Qiagen, Duesseldorf Germany). RNA quality was assayed by determination of the  RNA integrity number using the 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent). RNA samples were processed and hybridized to HumanHT-12 v4 Expression  BeadChip Kit (Illumina San Diego, CA) by the Mount Sinai Genomics Institute following the  manufacturer’s instructions, and raw expression data were output by the Illumina GenomeStudio software.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

