TITLE
Differential microRNA expression in the ovaries of high and low prolificacy pregnant sows from an Iberian x Meishan F2 intercross

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
Prolificacy related traits are of great economical interest in the pig industry. microRNAs (miRNAs) are post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression important for reproductive processes. In pigs, the roles of ovarian miRNAs during gestation remain unknown although the ovaries are essential during gestation. It has been hypothesised that ovarian miRNAs could participate during the porcine gestation and, moreover, they could influence the prolificacy levels of sows. The miRNA expression profile was compared in the ovaries of pregnant Iberian x Meishan F2 sows displaying extreme phenotypes regarding prolificacy levels defined as the number of embryos (NE) attached to the uterus at 30-32 days of gestation. miR-146a-5p and miR-142-3p were differentially expressed between high (NE≥13) and low (NE≤11) prolificacy sows. In silico functional analyses of the predicted mRNA targets for these miRNAs revealed that miR-146a-5p targets were mainly involved in the immune system response important for the establishment of the maternal-foetal tolerance, implantation and maintenance of pregnancy. On the other hand, miR-142-3p targets participated in different biological processes that would contribute to the homeostasis maintenance to ensure a correct functional development of the ovaries. miRNAs associated with prolificacy levels could regulate negatively, by a novel post-transcriptional mechanism, their predicted mRNA targets, PPM1K, TLR1 and CPEB2 which have been reported as differentially expressed in the ovaries of pregnant sows regarding the prolificacy levels. Furthermore, among predicted mRNA targets for miRNAs associated with prolificacy, four genes, differentially expressed in the ovaries of pregnant sows regarding prolificacy levels, (LRRK1, BAT1, CPEB2, CCL8) are proposed to be good candidate genes for litter size due to their location within confidence intervals for prolificacy QTL described previously.  Overall, it is suggested that the up-regulation of miR-146a-5p and miR-142-3p in the ovaries of pregnant sows could help in the establishment of a uterine environment, which would favor the embryonic development.

DESIGN
Total RNA was isolated from uterus of Iberian x Meishan F2 pregnant sows divided into two groups: High prolificacy sows (n=3) and Low prolificacy sows (n=3). RNA was labeled with the Cy3-like Hy3™ dye, mixed with a pool of RNA from the six samples labeled with the Cy5-like Hy5™ dye, and hybridized to two-color miRCURY™ arrays from Exiqon®.

PLATFORM
GPL16092 miRCURY LNA microRNA Array, 5th generation - hsa, mmu & rno [mapped to Sus scrofa]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

