TITLE
Gene Expression Analysis of Ovarian Samples

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The Homeobox (HOX) family of genes encodes transcription factors involved in basic developmental processes, most notably during embryogenesis. A possible HOX gene link between development and oncogenesis has recently been described. Dysregulation of HOX genes may be an early event in malignant transformation likely to induce antibody response and thus provide a potential marker for early diagnosis of cancer. Ovarian cancer is characterized by poor early detection and serves as an excellent model system to develop potential markers for early diagnosis. In this study we begin to characterize HOX gene expression in malignant tumors of the ovary and analyze the potential role of HOX genes as biomarkers for early detection of ovarian cancer. Microarray analysis of mRNA from human ovarian tissues was performed on 65 samples of normal, benign, borderline malignant and malignant ovarian tissue. These samples were analyzed using the Affymetrix Human Genome Focus GeneChip (HG-Focus) microarray to distinguish the differential pattern of mRNA expression between the four types of samples. Real-time reverse transcription PCR was utilized to confirm up-regulation of HOX genes as determined by microarray analysis. Our results demonstrate multiple HOX genes to be up-regulated in ovarian cancer. We have shown stepped increase in HOX expression comparing normal, benign neoplastic, and malignant human ovarian tissue samples.  This suggests dysregulation of HOX genes may be an early event in malignant transformation and warrants additional studies to validate HOX gene products as potential markers for early detection of ovarian cancer. Keywords: Human Ovarian cancer, HOX, Homeobox, microarray, gene expression

DESIGN
67 samples were analyzed. 4 groupings based on pathology (normal, benign, borderline malignant, malignant). An average of normal samples was used as controls. Cell lines were used as ovarian cancer control samples.

PLATFORM
GPL201 [HG-Focus] Affymetrix Human HG-Focus Target Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

