TITLE
Mechanistic analysis of the model obesogen Tributyltin in the 3T3-L1 cell line

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Obesogenic compounds are chemicals that might have an influence on obesity development through in utero or chronic lifetime exposure. Tributyltin (TBT) is one of the most studied obesogenic compounds, inducing adipogenesis in vitro and increasing body fat after in utero exposure of mice. This study was designed to unravel the molecular mechanisms of TBT, using microarray analysis, and to evaluate the use of toxicogenomics for obesogen screening. The murine 3T3-L1 cell line was used to study TBT induced adipogenesis. Lipid staining as well as gene expression measurements of an adipocyte specific marker gene were performed to select relevant concentrations (10 nM, 50 nM) and time points (day1, day10) for microarray analysis. Additionally, solvent control and positive control (MDI) treated 3T3-L1 cells were included in the analysis.   The microarray results were analysed using GO enrichment and Pathway analysis tools, which revealed enrichment of several GO terms involved in energy and fat metabolism after 10 days of TBT exposure. Pathway analysis unveiled PPAR signalling pathway as the sole pathway significantly enriched after 1 day and the most significantly enriched pathway after 10 days of exposure.  By examination of effects on both cell physiological and gene expression level we provide a detailed overview of TBT induced obesogenic mechanisms. To our knowledge, this is the first study delivering an in depth mechanistic outline of the mode of action of TBT as an obesogen. Furthermore, our results show that combining omics with 3T3-L1 cells is promising for screening of potential obesogenic compounds.

DESIGN
A separate v+2 A-optimal hybridization design was used for each time-point. Using this design each exposure condition is represented by three biological replicates, with each biological replicate analysed in technical duplicate while applying the dye swap principle to correct for dye bias. Two concentrations of TBT (10 nM, 50 nM), DMSO and MDI (positive control, adipogenic hormone cocktail) were the conditions tested, at two time-points (day 1 and day10).

PLATFORM
GPL11202 Agilent-026655 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K v2 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
23428407

