TITLE
microRNAs in C. elegans, P. pacificus, and S. ratti: Conserved miRNAs are candidate post-transcriptional regulators of developmental arrest in free-living and parasitic nematodes

ORGANISM
Caenorhabditis elegans

SUMMARY
Animal development is complex yet surprisingly robust. Animals may develop alternative phenotypes conditional on environmental changes. Under unfavorable conditions C. elegans larvae enter the dauer stage, a developmentally arrested, long-lived, and stress-resistant state. Dauer larvae of free-living nematodes and infective larvae of parasitic nematodes share many traits including a conserved endocrine signaling module (DA/DAF-12), which is essential for the formation of dauer and infective larvae. We speculated that conserved post-transcriptional regulatory mechanism might also be involved in executing the dauer and infective larvae fate. We used an unbiased sequencing strategy to characterize the microRNA (miRNA) gene complement in C. elegans, P. pacificus, and S. ratti. Our study raised the number of described miRNA genes to 257 for C. elegans, tripled the known gene set for P. pacificus to 362 miRNAs and is the first to describe miRNAs in a Strongyloides parasite. Moreover, we found a limited core set of 24 conserved miRNA families in all three species. Interestingly, our estimated expression fold changes between dauer vs. non-dauer stages and infective larvae vs. free-living stages reveal that despite the speed of miRNA gene set evolution in nematodes, homologous gene families with conserved ‘dauer-infective’ expression signatures are present. These findings suggest that common post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms are at work and that the same miRNA families play important roles in developmental arrest as well as long-term survival in free-living and parasitic nematodes.

DESIGN
miRNA profiling in mixed and developmentally arrested stages (dauer/infective larvae) of nematodes by small RNA deep sequencing using Illumina GAII, Illumina HiSeq 2000, and ABI SOLiD.

