TITLE
Iron uptake controls the generation of Leishmania infective forms through regulation of ROS levels .

ORGANISM
Leishmania amazonensis

SUMMARY
During its life cycle Leishmania undergoes extreme environmental changes, alternating between insect vectors and vertebrate hosts. In mammals the parasites replicate within parasitophorous vacuoles of macrophages, compartments that contain low concentrations of iron. Here we show that stimulation of iron transport, which is induced in Leishmania amazonensis by an iron-poor environment, triggers the differentiation of avirulent promastigotes into virulent amastigotes. Iron depletion from the culture medium triggered expression of the LIT1 ferrous iron transporter, growth arrest, and differentiation of wild type promastigotes into infective amastigotes. In contrast, LIT1 null promastigotes showed continued exponential growth in iron-poor media, followed by massive cell death. Iron depletion from the medium and LIT1 upregulation increased iron superoxide dismutase activity (FeSOD) in wild type, but not in LIT1 null parasites. Notably, the superoxide-generating drug menadione or H2O2 were sufficient to trigger differentiation of wild type promastigotes into fully infective amastigotes. On the other hand, LIT1 null promastigotes accumulated superoxide radical and initiated amastigote differentiation after exposure to H2O2, but not to menadione. Our results reveal a novel role for FeSOD activity and reactive oxygen species (ROS) in orchestrating the differentiation of Leishmania infective stages, in a process regulated by iron availability.

DESIGN
Four samples were obtained in total from wild-type L. amazonensis promastigotes grown for 24 hours in culture. Two of these  samples derived from medium with iron and two from mediam without iron.These two samples derived from each culture served as biological replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL16194 Illumina Genome Analyzer II (Leishmania amazonensis)

CITATIONS
23382545

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
