TITLE
Understanding the molecular events underpinning cultivar differences in physiological performance and heat tolerance

ORGANISM
Gossypium hirsutum

SUMMARY
Plants were acclimated for 4 d at optimal conditions (32/25 oC day/night) in the growth cabinet before initiation of the temperature treatment. For the control (32 oC), cabinet conditions were left unchanged during the treatment period. Due to limited growth cabinet space, plants of a comparative physiological age were transferred to the controlled environment growth cabinet after the control plants had been removed. Well-watered plants were exposed to heat stress by increasing the ambient air temperature to 42 oC (67% RH) during the photoperiod and 25 oC (40 % RH) during the dark period.  The third youngest fully expanded leaf of plants at the first square physiological age was sampled for all experiments. Three leaf tissue samples were collected for each genotype under the ambient or hot growth cabinet (12 samples total) at 0.5, 1, 3, and 7 h after initiation of the high temperature stress, where the time 0.5 samples were collected at 0930 h which equated to 3.5 h into the photoperiod. For RNA preparations, whole leaves were excised at the junction of the lamina and petiole, immediately snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80oC. Leaves were ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen and a 0.1 g sub-sample was taken and total RNA was extracted using a hot borate buffer.   ****[PLEXdb( http://www.plexdb.org ) has submitted this series at GEO on behalf of the original contributor,  Nicole Cottee.  The equivalent experiment is GO12 at PLEXdb.]

DESIGN
temperature: 32 C - cultivar: Sicala 45(3-replications);  temperature: 32 C - cultivar: Sicot 53(3-replications);  temperature: 42 - cultivar: Sicala 45(3-replications);  temperature: 42 - cultivar: Sicot 53(3-replications)

PLATFORM
GPL8672 [Cotton] Affymetrix Cotton Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

