TITLE
Expression data from rat liver stem-like WB-F344 cells treated with 3,3’,4,4’,5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 126)

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Although the tumor promoting effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), coplanar polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and related compounds in liver tissue are primarily attributed to activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), the underlying molecular mechanisms are still unclear. Liver progenitor (oval) cells have been suggested to constitute a potential target for hepatocarcinogenic chemicals. To better understand AhR-driven pathways we analyzed the transcriptional program in response to coplanar PCB 126 in rat liver progenitor WB-F344 cells using high density microarrays. After 6h treatment, we identified 145 significantly deregulated genes considered to be direct AhR-dependent target genes. The number of differentially regulated genes increased to 658 and 968 genes after 24h and 72h, respectively. Gene ontology analysis revealed that these genes were primarily involved in drug and lipid metabolism, cell cycle and growth control, cancer developmental processes, cell-cell communication and adhesion. Interestingly, the Wnt and TGF-beta signaling pathways, both being involved in developmental and tumorigenic processes, belonged to the most affected pathways. AhR and ARNT-dependent regulation of selected target genes of interest was then confirmed using TCDD as a model AhR agonist, together with pharmacological inhibition of the AhR and by RNA-interference techniques. We demonstrated AhR-dependent regulation of emerging and novel AhR target genes, such as Fst, Areg, Hbegf, Ctgf, Btg2, and Foxq1. Among them, the transcription factor Foxq1, recently suggested to contribute to tumor promotion and/or progression, was found to be regulated at both mRNA and protein levels by AhR/ARNT activation.

DESIGN
18 Total samples were analyzed (3 independent repeats for each treatment and time point). We generated the following pairwise comparisons: Control vs. PCB 126 at 6 h; Control vs. PCB 126 at 24 h; Control vs. PCB 126 at 72 h;

PLATFORM
GPL6194 [RaEx-1_0-st] Affymetrix Rat Exon 1.0 ST Array [probe set (exon) version]

CITATIONS
23196670

