TITLE
Leishmania donovani amastigotes: Nelfinavir (NFV)-sensitive (control) vs Nelfinavir-resistant [RNA expression profiling]

ORGANISM
Leishmania donovani

SUMMARY
Drug resistance is a major public health challenge in Leishmaniasis chemotherapy, particularly in the case of emerging Leishmania/HIV-1 co-infections. Recently, we have delineated the mechanism of cell death induced by the HIV-1 protease inhibitor, Nelfinavir, in the Leishmania parasite. In order to investigate the underlying molecular mechanism involved in Nelfinavir resistance, in vitro Nelfinavir resistant amastigotes were developed by direct drug pressure in culture. RNA expression profiling analyses of closely related Leishmania species were used as a screening tool to compare Nelfinavir-resistant and -sensitive parasites in order to identify candidate genes involved in drug resistance, and several genes were found to be differentially expressed. Comparative gene hybridization (CGH) analyses of Nelfinavir-resistant and -sensitive Leishmania using whole-genome 60-mer oligonucleotide microarrays were also carried out. RNA expression profiles and the CGH of Nelfinavir resistant vs sensitive Leishmania amastigotes suggest that parasites regulate mRNA levels either by modulating gene copy numbers through chromosome aneuploidy, or gene deletion/duplication by homologous recombination. Interestingly, supernumerary chromosomes 6 and 11 in the resistant parasites lead to upregulation of the ABC class of transporters, which are involved in vesicular trafficking. Transporter assays using radiolabeled Nelfinavir suggest that the drug accumulates in greater amounts in the resistant parasites and in a time dependent manner. Furthermore, high-resolution electron microscopy showed an increased number of vacuoles in Nelfinavir-resistant parasites. Together these results suggest that Nelfinavir is rapidly and dramatically sequestered in these intracellular vesicles.

DESIGN
Two condition experiment: NFV-sensitive vs resistant. Biological replicates: Three. One dye swap.

PLATFORM
GPL11330 Agilent custom Leishmania microarray v2

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

