TITLE
Heterologous hybridization to an oligonucleotide microarray monitors differential gene expression in Pinus radiata exposed to long-term Ethephon exposure

ORGANISM
Pinus radiata

SUMMARY
Comparison of transcriptomes from bark, developing xylem and xylem of P. radiata saplings exposed to 0 or 1mg of Ethephon in lanolin for 1 or 8 weeks We developed an oligonucleotide microarray using sequences (mostly from Pinus taeda) from public sequence databases. These sequences were reconstituted into a non-redundant database by CAP3 assembly and used as templates for automated design of 60-mer oligonucleotide probes through eArray, Agilent’s online facility. The microarray slides, manufactured by Agilent, were used to monitor gene expression in an Ethephon-induction experiment. Ethephon was dispersed in lanolin paste and applied in a 3 cm band near the base of the stem of 2-year old Pinus radiata saplings. RNA was extracted from bark, cambial region, also known as “developing xylem”, and xylem tissues exposed for 1 or 8 weeks to Ethephon. The transcriptomes from these extracts were compared by hybridization onto the All-Pinus microarray slides. Statistically significant differentially expressed genes identified by limma (Linear Models for Microarray Data) were subsequently analysed by singular enrichment analysis through the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) portal. Results revealed that bark, cambial region and xylem generate mostly mutually exclusive cohorts of genes and Gene Ontology (GO) classes. Ethephon induction led to the upregulation of xylem genes related to the metabolism of phenylpropanoids and flavonoids and to defence responses, specifically, fungal/insect attack and oxidative stress. Independent validation of the microarray data for five genes was obtained by quantitative RT-PCR. The results are also interpreted in reference to gross and microscopic morphological changes. These results confirm the utility of the All-Pinus microarray for transcriptomic research in P. radiata.

DESIGN
Series of 2-color, 2 condition experiments in 12  180k arrays. Main comparison is within tissues exposed to 0 [control] or 1 mg Ethephon. 2nd level of comparison is between tissues [bark, xylem scraping, xylem]. Third level of comparison is between time [ 1 or 8 week exposure]. One slide is hybridized with cRNA generated from control and treated tissues with the same duration of exposure to Ethephon. Two biological replicates [each biological rep is a 2 y old cutting propagated clone] for treated plants whilst control consists of RNA pooled, in equal proportions [estimated by UV absorbance], from 2 untreated  biological replicates.]. Dyes used for each sample are indicated in sample description.

PLATFORM
GPL16286 Agilent-029908 100826_All_Pinus

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

