TITLE
Nuclear protein (Nupr)-1 is required for pancreatic adenocarcinoma development in Pdx1-cre;LSL-KrasG12D;Ink4a/Arffl/fl mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Nuclear Protein 1 (Nupr1) is a major actor of the cell stress response required for KrasG12D-driven formation of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplastic (PanINs) lesions in mice. We investigated the impact of Nupr1-depletion on the development and biology of murin pancreatic adenocarcinomas (PDAC) in the Pdx1-cre;LSL-KrasG12D;Ink4a/Arffl/fl (KIC) mice. We found that only one half of Nupr1-deficient mice developed PDAC. This is related to increased caspase 3 activity and low IER3 expression in Nupr1-deficient;KIC in the pancreas. Moreover, when Nupr1-deficient;KIC mice do develop PDAC, tumors present with impaired epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Transcriptoma analysis revealed that Nupr1-deficient and Nupr1wt;KIC PDACs presented enrichment of gene signatures of the human classical- and quasi-mesenchymal (QM)-PDAC respectively. Moreover, Nupr1-deficient;KIC PDACs shared with human classical-PDACs overexpression of Kras-activation genes. In addition, cells derived from Nupr1-deficient;KIC PDACs formed fewer microspheres in vitro compared to Nupr1wt;KIC cells, indicative of stemness impairment in the absence of Nupr1. Finally, we found that Nupr1-deficient;KIC cells were more sensitive to some anticancer drugs than their Nupr1wt counterpart. Hence, this study establishes the pivotal role of Nupr1 in PDAC progression after PanIN and in PDAC EMT in vivo, with an impact in PDAC cell stemness. As a consequence, according to absence or presence of Nupr1, KIC mice develop tumors that phenocopy human classical- or QM-PDAC, respectively, thus becoming attractive models for preclinical drug trials.

DESIGN
We investigated the impact of the homozygous deletion of the Nupr1 gene on pancreatic adenocarcinoma development and biology in the Pdx1-cre;LSL-KrasG12D;Ink4a/Arffl/fl (KIC) mouse model.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
24026351

