TITLE
Effects of 30 days resveratrol supplementation on adipose tissue morphology and gene expression patterns in obese men

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Polyphenolic compounds, such as resveratrol, have recently received widespread interest due to their ability to mimic effects of calorie restriction. The objective of the present study was to gain more insight into the effects of 30 days resveratrol supplementation on adipose tissue morphology and underlying processes. Nine healthy obese men were supplemented with placebo and 150mg/day resveratrol for 30 days, separated by a 4-week washout period. A postprandial abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue biopsy was collected to assess adipose tissue morphology and gene expression using microarray analysis. Resveratrol significantly decreased adipocyte size, with a shift towards a reduction in the proportion of large and very large adipocytes and an increase in small adipocytes. Microarray analysis revealed downregulation of Wnt, Notch and BMP/TGF-β signaling pathways and upregulation of pathways involved in cell cycle after resveratrol supplementation, suggesting enhanced adipogenesis. Furthermore, the lysosomal/phagosomal pathway and the transcription factor EB were upregulated, reflecting an alternative pathway of lipid breakdown by autophagy. These data suggest that adipose tissue is an important target tissue for the effects of resveratrol in humans, but further research is necessary to investigate whether it translates into an improved adipose tissue function.

DESIGN
In a double-blind randomized crossover study, 9 healthy obese men were supplemented with placebo and 150 mg/day resveratrol for 30 days, with a 4-week washout period in between. At the end of each intervention period, a biopsy was taken from the abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue, which was subjected to gene expression profiling.

PLATFORM
GPL11532 [HuGene-1_1-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.1 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
23958793

