TITLE
Gene expression profiles in white blood cell subgroups

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In recent years gene expression profiling with microarrays has become an important tool in genomic research. Its usefulness in diagnosis and disease classification is now well documented. In many cases routine access to tissues primarily involved in pathophysiological processes is not possible. Attempts have therefore been made to use gene expression patterns in white blood cells (WBCs) as surrogate markers. We investigated if the analysis of gene expression profiles in whole white blood cells is sufficient or if improvements in reliability and sensitivity can be obtained by the analysis of sorted subtypes of WBCs. Using Affymetrix U133A gene chips we have determined gene expression profiles in WBCs, PBMCs, and T-cells. Changes in gene expression were induced in these cells by oxygen-consumption controlled treadmill exercise of healthy volunteers. We found that gene expression changes in T-cells, which indicated the presence of cell activation and apoptosis after exercise, were masked when mixed cell populations were analyzed. Of 157 genes that were found significantly differently expressed in T-cells when before and after exercise samples were compared, only 50 showed significant differences when PBMCs were analyzed; in WBCs only 20 of these genes showed significant differences. In the latter cells, some genes actually showed a significant change in the opposite direction. We conclude that the threshold for the detection of gene expression changes is lowered when the analysis is done in leukocyte subpopulations. In addition, knowledge about the cellular origin of an observed expression shift facilitates the interpretation of the obtained results. Keywords: T Lymphocytes, exercise, microarray analysis

DESIGN
Genexpression profiles from 3 different probands before and after exhaustive exercise in White Blood Cells, Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells and T Lymphocytes, respectively, have been meassured on Affymetrix HG 133 A 2.0 GeneChips.

PLATFORM
GPL571 [HG-U133A_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

