TITLE
Bis(2-chloroethoxy)methane-induced heart toxicity and recovery in male fisher rats

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Specific gene changes after exposure to the heart toxin, bis(2-chloroethoxy)methane,  were analyzed to elucidate critical pathways associated with recovery from heart toxicity.   Bis(2-chloroethoxy)methane was administered  to male F344/N rats at 0, 200, 400, or 600 mg/kg by dermal exposure for up to 16 days.   Heart toxicity occurred at day 2 of exposure in all three regions of the heart (atrium, ventricle, interventricular septum) and was characterized by myofiber vacuolation, necrosis, mononuclear-cell infiltration,  and atrial thrombosis.  Ultrastructural analysis revealed that the primary site of damage occured in the mitochondrion.  Damaged mitochondria had disrupted cristae and loss of membrane structure, and distention of the myocardial sarcoplasmic reticulum.   By day 5, even though daily dosing was continued, the heart toxic lesions begin to resolved.  By day 16, even though BCEM treatment continued, the heart appeared normal. RNA was extracted from control and dosed rats at day 2 and day 5, and analyzed for gene change by PCR. Gene changes associated with promoting cell growth including up regulation of growth factors and cell adhesion molecules were up regulated.    Temperature regulation was promoted by up regulation of uncoupling proteins.    Genes controlling the action potential of the heart, including ion flow and G protein signals, were altered. Because mitochondria are damaged by BCEM exposure, preserving and restoring energy function to the heart is considered to be essential, and up regulation of components of the ATP synthase unit occurred by day 5. Significant gene changes included up regulation of transcription factors, growth factors, membrane bound G protein signals, and ion transport controls.    Multiple gene changes in the heart may contribute to restoration of heart function after exposure to environmental cardiotoxins. Keywords: toxicity, recovery, cardiac, heart

