TITLE
Pseudomonas syringae B728a responses to environmental stresses and growth in and on bean leaves

ORGANISM
Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae B728a

SUMMARY
Some strains of the foliar pathogen Pseudomonas syringae are adapted for growth and survival on leaf surfaces and in the leaf interior.  Global transcriptome profiling was used to evaluate if these two habitats offer distinct environments for bacteria and thus present distinct driving forces for adaptation.  Further transcriptome profiling was performed to understand the various environmental conditions that P. syringae cells encounter during their association with plants.   RNA was collected from P. syringae pv. syringae strain B728a cells that were exposed to seven treatments.  The treatments included five in vitro treatments, namely exposing cells to a basal medium, sodium chloride to confer an osmotic stress, hydrogen peroxide to confer an apoplastic growth, iron limitation, nitrogen limitation.  They also included two in planta treatments, namely recovering cells from epiphytic sites after surface inoculation and 72 h of growth on bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) leaves and recovering cells from apoplastic sites after infiltration and 48 h of growth in bean leaves.  The results suggested that B728a cells experience vastly different environments when growing on the surface versus the interior of leaves and identified distinct traits that are likely used for persistence and growth in these environments.

DESIGN
RNA was collected from B728a cells that were exposed to seven treatments, each with two biological replicates in each of three laboratories.  Experimental methods were standardized across the three laboratories.  For the in vitro treatments, exponential cells from two independent cultures were each exposed to the five treatments.  For each treatment, the cells originating from the two cultures were pooled and the RNA was extracted; this was repeated in its entirety and the two RNA pools were combined.  The resulting RNA representing four independent cultures served as a single biological replicate.  Two biological replicates for each treatment were generated in this manner in each of three separate laboratories. Epiphytic B728a populations were established following spray inoculation onto bean leaves and subsequent incubation; the epiphytic cells recovered from 400 to 600 leaves inoculated at one time served as a biological replicate, and the procedure was repeated to provide two biological replicates.  Due to the availability of facilities, all of the epiphytic treatments were conducted at as single laboratory, with cultures provided from each of the other laboratories, and the cell pellets were returned to those laboratories for RNA extraction and analysis. Apoplastic B728a populations were established following vacuum infiltration into bean leaves and subsequent incubation; the apoplastic cells recovered from 40 to 80 leaves inoculated at one time served as a biological replicate, and two biological replicates were generated at each of the three laboratories. The RNA from all treatments was submitted to Roche Nimblegen, Inc where it was labeled and hybridized to an ORF-based microarray that included 5,071 ORFs and 61 putative sRNAs, with each ORF represented by 14 60-mer nucleotide probes.  The fluorescence intensity for each probe was measured and subjected to robust multiarray averaging, which included adjustment for the background intensity, log2 transformation, quantile normalization and median polishing, and a robust estimated mean value was determined for each ORF and putative sRNA on the array.

PLATFORM
GPL16328 NimbleGen Pseudomonas syringae B728a custom expression array [090326_P_syringae_B728a_expr]

CITATIONS
23319638

