TITLE
IgG antibody profiling of Leptospira interrogans serovar Copenhageni in infected and non-infected subjects using protein microarray

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Leptospirosis is the most widespread zoonotic disease in the world. The lack of an adequate laboratory test is a major barrier for the diagnosis, especially during the early stages of illness, when antibiotic therapy is most effective. Therefore, there is a critical need for an efficient diagnostic test for this life threatening disease. In order to identify new targets that could be used as diagnostic makers for leptopirosis, we constructed a protein microarray chip comprising 61% of Leptospira interrogans proteome and investigated the IgG response against leptospiral antigens from 274 individuals, including 80 acute-, 80 convalescent-phase patients and 114 healthy control subjects from regions with endemic, high endemic and no endemic transmission of leptospirosis. A nitrocellulose line blot assay was performed to validate the accuracy of the protein microarray results. We found 16 antigens that can discriminate between acute cases and healthy individuals from a region with high endemic transmission of leptospirosis, and 18 antigens that distinguish convalescent cases. Some of the antigens identified in this study, such as LipL32, the non-identical domains of the Lig proteins, GroEL and Loa22 are already known to be recognized by sera from human patients, thus serving as a proof-of-concept for the serodiagnostic antigen discovery approach. Several novel antigens were identified, including the hypothetical protein LIC10215 which showed good sensitivity and specificity rates for both acute- and convalescent-phase patients. Our study is the first large-scale evaluation of immunodominant antigens associated with naturally acquired leptospiral infection and novel as well as known serodiagnostic leptospiral antigens that are recognized by antibodies in the sera of leptospirosis cases were identified. The novel antigens identified here may have potential use in both the development of new tests and the improvement of currently available assays for diagnosing this neglected tropical disease. Further research is needed to assess the accuracy of these antigens in more appropriate diagnostic platforms.

DESIGN
Antibody profiling was peformed on sera  from infected and non-infected subjects to investigate the IgG response against leptospiral antigens. These samples comprised 80 acute-, 80 convalescent-phase patients and 114 healthy control subjects, including 29 subjects from United States (non-endemic area), 35 blood donors from Salvador/Brazil (endemic area) and 50 healthy individuals from region with high endemicity of leptospirosis.

PLATFORM
GPL16351 UCI Leptospira interrogans serovar Copenhageni Protein Microarray chip LI6

CITATIONS
24147173

