TITLE
Expression data from human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) treated with DMSO, telmisartan, or telmisartan and amlodipine

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Objective – Telmisartan, an angiotensin II type 1 (AT1) receptor blocker, and amlodipine, a calcium channel blocker, are antihypertensive agents clinically used as monotherapy or in combination. They exert beneficial cardiovascular effects independently of blood pressure lowering and classic mechanisms of action. In this study, we investigate molecular mechanisms responsible for the off-target effects of telmisartan and telmisartan-amlodipine in endothelial cells (EC), using an unbiased approach. Approach and Results – In human umbilical vein endothelial cells, microarray analysis of gene expression followed by pathway enrichment analysis and qRT-PCR validation revealed that telmisartan modulates the expression of key genes responsible for cell cycle progression and apoptosis. Amlodipine’s effect was similar to control. EC exposed to telmisartan, but not amlodipine, losartan or valsartan, exhibited a dose-dependent impairment of cell growth and failed to enter the S-phase of the cell cycle. Similarly, telmisartan inhibited proliferation in COS-7 cells lacking the AT1 receptor. In telmisartan-treated EC, phosphorylation and activation of Akt as well as MDM2 was reduced, leading to accumulation of p53 in the nucleus, where it represses the transcription of cell cycle promoting genes. Phosphorylation of GSK3β was also reduced, resulting in rapid proteolytic turnover of CyclinD1. Telmisartan induced downregulation of proapoptotic genes and protected EC from serum starvation- and 7-ketocholesterol-induced apoptosis. Conclusions – Telmisartan exerts antiproliferative and antiapoptotic effects in EC. This may account for the improved endothelial dysfunction observed in the clinical setting.

DESIGN
HUVEC were treated with 100 µmol/L telmisartan or 5 µmol/L amlodipine or both in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or an equivalent volume of DMSO alone, as control, for 24 hours. Microarray analysis was carried out on two biological replicates per group (total of six samples). See PROTOCOL section for experimental details.

