TITLE
Expression data from Arabidopsis seedlings upon LRIS using NAA (1-Naphthaleneacetic acid) or non-auxin-like lateral root inducer naxillin

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
The acquisition of water and nutrients by plant roots is a fundamental aspect of agriculture and strongly depends on root architecture. Root branching and expansion of the root system is achieved through the development of lateral roots and is to a large extent controlled by the plant hormone auxin. However, the pleiotropic effects of auxin or auxin-like molecules on root systems complicate the study of lateral root development. Here we describe a small-molecule screen in Arabidopsis thaliana that identified naxillin as what is to our knowledge the first non-auxin-like molecule that promotes root branching. By using naxillin as a chemical tool, we identified a new function for root cap-specific conversion of the auxin precursor indole-3-butyric acid into the active auxin indole-3-acetic acid and uncovered the involvement of the root cap in root branching. Delivery of an auxin precursor in peripheral tissues such as the root cap might represent an important mechanism shaping root architecture. To further explore the specificity of naxillin for lateral root development, we compared the early effects of naxillin at the transcriptome level with NAA (1-Naphthaleneacetic acid) in roots of 3-day-old seedlings after 2-h and 6-h treatment.

DESIGN
Arabidopsis thaliana (L). Heynh., Col-0 seeds were germinated vertically on solid medium derived from standard MS medium supplemented with 10 μM NPA (1-N-Naphthylphthalamic acid). Three days after germination, plants were transferred to 10 μM NAA (1-Naphthaleneacetic acid) or 50 μM naxillin for 2 and 6 hours. Plants were sampled before (Roots at T0, NPA) or after treatment (Roots at T1 and T2). RNA isolation was performed on 500 root sections (only root without meristems) for each sample. All sampling points were performed in three independent experiments.

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
22885787

