TITLE
Root nitrate response of Col-0 plants and tga1/tga4 mutant plants

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Nitrate regulates plant growth and development and acts as a potent signal to control gene expression in Arabidopsis. Using an integrative bioinformatics approach we identified TGA1 and TGA4 as putative regulatory factors that mediate nitrate responses in Arabidopsis thaliana roots. We showed that both TGA1 and TGA4 mRNAs accumulate strongly and quickly after nitrate treatments in root organs in a tissue-specific manner. Phenotypic analysis of tga1/tga4 double mutant plants indicated that TGA1 and TGA4 are necessary for nitrate modulation of both primary and lateral root growth. Global gene expression analysis revealed that 97% of the genes with altered expression in tga1/tga4 double mutant plants are regulated by nitrate treatments indicating these transcription factors have a specific role in nitrate responses in Arabidopsis root organs. Among the nitrate-responsive genes that depend on TGA1/TGA4 for normal regulation of gene expression, we found nitrate transporters NRT2.1, NRT2.2 and nitrite reductase (NIR) genes. Specific binding of TGA1 to its cognate DNA sequence on the target gene promoters was confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. These results identify TGA1 and TGA4 as important regulatory factors of the nitrate response in Arabidopsis roots.

DESIGN
Arabidopsis seedlings of the Col-0 and tga1/tga4 genotypes were grown on hydroponic medium containing 1X MS salts without Nitrogen, supplemented with 0.5 mM ammonium succinate as Nitrogen source and 3 mM sucrose on a Percival chamber under a photoperiod of 16 hours of light (100 μE/m2/sec) and 8 hours of dark at 22°C for 14 days. The plants were treated at the onset of the light cycle with 5 mM KNO3 or 5 mM KCl as control for 2 hours. Whole roots were cut from seedlings and frozen on liquid Nitrogen. Total RNA was extracted using the TriZol reagent. 3 independent biological replicates were performed.

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

