TITLE
The whole genome transcription analysis reveals the regulatory network for Listeria monocytogenes biofilm formation is modified in the prfA deletion mutant

ORGANISM
Listeria monocytogenes EGD-e

SUMMARY
The foodborne pathogen Listeria monocytogenes has the ability to develop biofilm in food-processing environment, which becomes a major concern for the food safety. PrfA, a key transcriptional activator that regulates most of the known listerial virulence gene expression, has been shown to promote L. monocytogenes biofilm formation. In this study, the whole genome microarray was used to identify differentially expressed genes associated with the putative interaction between biofilm formation and PrfA in L. monocytogenes. Comparative transcriptome analyses indicated over 21.9% of the L. monocytogenes EGDe genes (627 out of 2857 predicted) were altered in their expression in biofilm cells relative to planktonic cell populations. These genes were classed into different functional categories which cover most of the biochemical functions encountered in bacterial cells, especially involved in ion transport, DNA repair, and cell wall biosynthesis based on significant enrichment of GO terms. Among them, 185 genes were identified to be associated with PrfA and biofilm formation by comparison of the whole gene expression profiles of L. monocytogenes EGDe and its ΔprfA mutant. The expression tendency of these PrfA-associated and biofilm-specific genes were mainly opposite in ΔprfA biofilm, and most of them are involved in phage-related function, membrane bioenergetics, and cell wall. Our results indicated that L. monocytogenes biofilm formation is probably controlled by the complex regulation network involved variable genes required for the different biological pathways. This regulatory network is modified in the prfA deletion mutant in order to maintain its stable biofilm lifestyle.

DESIGN
Gene expression of planktonic cells and biofilm cells in Listeria monocytogenes EGDe and prfA isogenic deletion strain EGDeΔprfA with cultivated in MEM and BHI for 48 hours, were mesasued using Agilent Listeria monocytogenes customized whole-genome microarray 8x15 array. Three replicates.

