TITLE
Direct ChIP-bisulfite sequencing reveals a role of H3K27me3 mediating aberrant hypermethylation of promoter CpG islands in cancer cells (RNA-seq)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Aberrant DNA hypermethylation of CpG island (CGI) promoters are associated with transcriptional repression of many tumor suppressor genes and lead to tumor progression in many cancers. Most recently, one research group observed that aberrantly hypermethylated genes in multiple cancers are already repressed, but their promoters are maintained in a hypomethylated state in pre-cancerous tissues.Their studies didn't provide a clue to explain by what mechanisms those genes were repressed in pre-cancerous tissues. Another research group found that many genes with de novo promoter hypermethylation in colon cancer were among the subset of genes " bivalently " marked in embryonic stem cells and adult stem/progenitor cells by repressive Polycomb group proteins (PcG), which are known for maintaining low, but poised, transcription.These observations provide a clue that CGI promoter hypermethylation in cancers is associated with PcG target genes in pre-cancerous tissues.we took advantage of ChIP-BS-seq technology and applied it to examine H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 profiles for one normal lymphoblastoid cell line (YH) and three cancer cell lines including one cervical cancer cell line (Hela) and two gastric cancer (GC) cell lines (BGC-823 and AGS).

DESIGN
We aplied ChIP-BS technology to examine H3K27me3 marks, which are catalyzed by the SET domain histone methyltransferase EZH2 and have a repressive function with 50bp pair-end sequencing. found H3K27me3 marks were enriched preferentially at CpG islands, (+/-500) transcription start sites (TSSs) and exons in two GC cell lines (BGC-823 and AGS). In YH cells, H3K27me3 marks were only preferentially enriched at CpG islands. In contrast, Hela cells presented a reverse pattern with highest H3K27me3 enrichment in intergenic regions. To confirm this result in Hela cells, we performed two independent replicates of ChIP-Seq and ChIP-BS-seq. Cause of useful was relative small. we still sequenced one 100bp pe reads replicate for H3K4me3 and two replicate for H3K27me3 ChIP-BS-seq.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
24407023

