TITLE
Genome-wide expression profile of human trabecular meshwork cultured cells, non-glaucomatous and POAG tissue

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The goal of this study was to contrast genome-wide gene expression profiles of cultured human trabecular meshwork (HTM) cells, to that of control and primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) HTM tissues. Total RNA from cultured HTM cells and HTM tissue dissected from control and POAG anterior segments fixed in RNA later™ was linearly amplified with the OvationTM Biotin RNA Amplification and Labeling System and individually hybridized to Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 high density microarrays. Data analysis was performed using the GeneSpring Software 7.0. Selected genes showing significant differential expression were validated by Quantitative real-time PCR in nonamplified RNA. Cultured HTM cells retained the expression of some genes characteristic of the HTM tissue, including chitinase 3-like 1 and matrix Gla protein, but demonstrated downregulation of physiologically important genes such as myocilin. POAG HTM tissue showed relatively small changes compared to that of control donors. These changes included the statistically significant upregulation of several genes associated with inflammation and acute-phase response, including selectin-E (ELAM-I), as well as the downregulation of the antioxidants, paraoxonase 3 and ceruloplasmin. Downregulation in cultured HTM cells of genes potentially relevant for outflow pathway function highlights the importance of developing new conditions for the culture of TM cells capable of preserving the characteristics of TM cells in vivo. Comparative analysis between control and POAG tissues suggests that the upregulation of inflammation-associated genes might be involved in the progression of glaucoma. Keywords: Cell type comparison

DESIGN
Total RNA from three cultured HTM cells and HTM tissue dissected from three pairs of control and two pairs of POAG anterior segments fixed in RNA later™ was linearly amplified with the OvationTM Biotin RNA Amplification and Labeling System and individually hybridized to Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 high density microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
16862071

