TITLE
Sustained expression of cyclin D1 or cyclin D1/KE in mouse mammary gland

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Analysis of mammary glands from tet-inducible(rtTA) transgenic mice expressing cyclin D1 using Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST GeneChip arrays. MMTV-rtTA transgenic mice (MMTV-Mouse Mammary Tumor Virus promoter) were cross-mated to  cyclin D1 transgenic mice under control of tet operon. 8-week-old tetracycline-inducible cyclin D1/rtTA bi-transgenic pregnant female mice (12 days postcoitus) were treated with doxycycline through drinking water supplementation at a final concentration of 2 mg/ml. Control mice were rtTA transgenics alone and treated in the same manner. After 7 days of doxycycline treatment, the mice were sacrificed and mammary glands taken for RNA isolation. Results provide insight into the in vivo gene expression pattern regulated by cyclin D1 through acute induction. Analysis of mammary glands from MMTV-cyclin D1/WT and MMTV-cyclin D1/KE using Affymetrix Mouse 430A v2.0 GeneChip arrays. Cyclin D1 point mutant, cyclin D1/KE K112E (K112E) contains a lysine to glutamine substitution at amino acid position 112. cyclin D1. The cyclin D1/KE mutant fails to induce cyclin D1-dependent kinase activity. Female MFD1, MFD1-KE, and WT mice were monitored twice weekly, up to 760 days, for the development of palpable tumors. Those developing palpable tumors were sacrificed within a week of tumor detection. Tumors were dissected and portions snap frozen for RNA isolation. Results provide insight into the in vivo gene expression pattern regulated by cyclin D1 that is kinase independent.

DESIGN
Two separate control mice were positive for MMTV-rtTA transgene compared to 3 separate cyclin D1/rtTA bitransgenic female mice and 3 separate cyclin D1 KE mutant/rtTA bitransgenic female mice (Mouse Gene 1.0 ST arrays).  Three separate control WT FvBmice were compared to three MMTV-cyclin D1/WT and 3 MMTV-cyclin D1/KE  mice (Mouse 430A v2.0 arrays).

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version] GPL8321 [Mouse430A_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430A 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

