TITLE
Gene expression profiles in group G streptococci during infection

ORGANISM
Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis GGS_124

SUMMARY
Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. equeisimilis (SDSE) has Lancefield group G or C antigens. Recent epidemiological studies reveal that invasive SDSE infections have been increasing in Asia, Europe and US. Although SDSE possesses similar virulence factors to S. pyogenes including streptolysin S (SLS) and streptolysin O (SLO), some important S. pyogenes virulence factors including active superantigens, SpeB and a hyarulonic acids capsule are missing in SDSE genome. The mechanisms and the key virulence factors for causing invasive diseases by SDSE are poorly understood. Here, we analyzed the transcriptome of SDSE in vivo using the murine sepsis model, revealing the strategy of SDSE to destruct host tissues with the virulence factors and to scavenge depleted nutrients. The expression of SLO operon increased at relatively early stage of infection while the SLS and hyaluronidases upregulated after 4h post infection. Microarray data suggested that SDSE degraded host tissue polysaccharides by streptococcal-secreting poly/oligosaccharide lyases and simultaneously used the Entner-Doudoroff pathway to metabolize acquired carbohydrates. A global negative virulence gene regulator CsrRS of SDSE modulated the expressions of genes encoding SLS and the carbohydrate metabolism enzymes. Moreover, csrS deficient mutant induced sever systemic hemolysis in mice. The most frequently isolated stG6792 strains from invasive disease secreted abundant SLS and SLO rather than other SDSE emm types, indicating the relationship between the SLS and SLO productions and poor outcome by the stG6792 strain infection. Our findings suggest that the concomitant regulation of virulence factors destructing the host tissues and metabolic enzymes play an important role to produce invasive diseases by SDSE.

DESIGN
To analyze gene expressions in group G streptococci with the murine infection model, we developed a custom microarray for Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis (SDSE) based on the genome sequences of three SDSE strains; GGS_124, ATCC12923 and RE378. We intraperitoneally inoculated 10^8 CFU of GGS_124 stain and the csrS deficient mutant into ddY mice. Bacterial cells were collected from the abdominal cavity at 0, 2, 4 and 8 h post infection. GGS_124 cells were also collected from OD600=0.6 culture in brain heart infusion broth as a control.

PLATFORM
GPL17625 Agilent-034814 Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. Equisimilis 15K J11420

CITATIONS
23901096

