TITLE
Caco-2 incubation with different doses of Lactobacillus

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Lactobacillus plantarum is found in a variety of fermented foods and as such, consumed for centuries. Some strains are natural inhabitants of the human gastro-intestinal tract and like other Lactobacillus species, L. plantarum has been extensively studied for its immunomodulatory properties and its putative health-promoting effects (probiotic). Being the first line of host defense intestinal epithelial cells (IEC) are key players in the recognition and initiation of responses to gut microorganisms. Results: Using high-density oligonucleotide microarrays we examined the gene expression profiles of differentiated Caco-2 cells exposed to various doses of L. plantarum. In addition, the effects were correlated to monolayer permeability studies and measurement of lactic acid production. A transcriptional dose-dependent IEC response to L. plantarum was found. Incubation of Caco-2 with a low bacterial dose induced a specific response, not due to cytotoxicity or production of lactic acid, including modulation of cell cycle and cell signaling functions. Exposure of Caco-2 cells to larger amounts of bacteria, accompanied by the production of lactic acid and glucose depletion, provoked increased permeability and supposed non-specific defense responses. Conclusions: These results suggest that IEC are able to sense and react to the presence of gut bacteria. This study provides the first description of global transcriptional response of human IEC to a commensal lactic acid bacterium, and it shows the importance of choosing physiological bacterial doses to prevent the observation of non-specific host reactions. Keywords: host-microbe interaction; dose response; transcriptional analysis

DESIGN
Caco-2 cells were exposed for 10h to Lactobacillus. Fourteen samples are analyzed: 4 control Caco-2, 4 Caco-2 exposed to a low dose (10) of Lactobacillus, 4 Caco-2 exposed to a medium dose (100) of Lactobacillus, 2 Caco-2 exposed to a high dose (1000) of Lactobacillus. All 14 RNA samples are labeled with Cy5 and hybridized to a common reference (undifferentiated Caco-2, untreated) RNA labeled with Cy3

PLATFORM
GPL3501 UMCU Human 19k array v1

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

