TITLE
Comparison of gene expression in three strains of Spodoptera Frugiperda (Insecta: Lepidoptera: Noctuidae)

ORGANISM
Spodoptera frugiperda

SUMMARY
The aim of this experiment was to compare the transciptome of the fall armyworm (Spodoptera frugiperda) strain SUS (a laboratory insecticide-susceptible standard) with organophosphate (OP) and pyrethroid (PYR) resistant strains were collected in cornfields located in Minas Gerais and Mato Grosso States, Brazil, in 2008 and maintained in the laboratory under selection with chlorpyrifos (at increasing discriminating doses from 100 up to 400 µg of insecticide/g of insect in a topical bioassay) or lambda-cyhalothrin (from  8.4 up to 27 µg of insecticide/g of insect) respectively The custom microarray used in this study was designed using the Agilent eArray platform (Agilent Technologies). A SurePrint HD (8×15k) expression array was designed using  the base composition and the best probe methodologies to design sense orientation 60-mer probes with a 3′ bias. The FAW EST database (SPODOBASE) was used as the reference transcriptome (Negre, Hotelier et al. 2006). These sequences are derived from 8 cDNA libraries as follows: Sf1F: Fat body, Sf1H: Hemocyte, Sf1M: Midgut, Sf1P: Pool of various tissues, Sf2H: Immune Challenged hemocytes, Sf2L: Sf21 Cell lines sequences, Sf2M: Xenobiotic Induced Midgut and Sf9L: Sf9 cell lines sequences. All assembled contigs and singlets were kindly sent by the website maintainers. The BLAST2GO software v.2.3.1 ( http://www.blast2go.org ) was used to annotate the EST database. 60-mer probes were designed for all 7,552 assembled contigs and 5,519 annotated singlets (BlastX), totaling 13,071 sequences. For contigs encoding detoxification enzymes (P450s, GSTs and CEs) three probes were designed. Additional probe groups for 15 control genes were also included. For reference all sequences are included in the zip file with array data. References: Negre, V., T. Hotelier, et al. (2006). " SPODOBASE : an EST database for the lepidopteran crop pest Spodoptera. " BMC Bioinformatics 7: 322.

DESIGN
Two-condition experiment. Slide 1: SUS vs. OP S. fugiperda strains. Slide 2: SUS vs. PYR S. fugiperda strains.  Biological replicates: 4 pools of RNA extracted from four pools of 5 second instar larvae. Technical Replicates: None, the biological replicates incorporated a dye swap. Total replication: four replicates for each strain.

PLATFORM
GPL16455 Agilent-035981 spod array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

