TITLE
The transcriptomic basis of oviposition behaviour in the parasitoid wasp Nasonia vitripennis

ORGANISM
Nasonia vitripennis

SUMMARY
For many behaviours studied at the phenotypic level, we have little or no idea of where to start searching for “candidate” genes: the transcriptome provides such a starting point. Here we consider transcriptomic changes associated with oviposition in the parasitoid wasp Nasonia vitripennis. Oviposition is a key behaviour, as females are faced with a variety of decisions that will impact offspring fitness. These include choosing between hosts of differing quality, as well as deciding on clutch size and offspring sex ratio. We compared the whole-body transcriptomes of resting or ovipositing female Nasonia using a “DEEP-Sage” gene expression approach on the Illumina sequencing platform.

DESIGN
Single 2-day old mated Nasonia vitripennis females (ASymC strain) were isolated in a glass vial and provided with a single host to produce F1 daughters. Eight 2-day old mated F1 females were subsequently provided with three hosts to produce the F2 test females. We randomly selected one host from each F1 female, and isolated 16 2-day old mated F2 test females in glass tubes, of which eight were randomly allocated to the oviposition treatment and eight to the resting treatment. We provided the test females with a single host for 24 hours as pre-treatment to facilitate egg development. We then discarded the pre-treatment hosts and gave each female a piece of chromatography paper soaked in honey solution for a further 24 hours. For the experiment, we transferred the females to 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes that contained a single host for the oviposition experiment, or were empty for the resting treatment. After 60 mins, females were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored on dry-ice until the addition of RNAlater-ICE (Ambion, Austin, TX, USA) after which they were transferred to -20C. All females in the oviposition treatment were observed to have commenced ovipositing. We pooled the F2 test females from each F1 mother according to treatment, generating a total of eight pooled samples per treatment (consisting of 8 females per pool) for RNA isolation and sequencing.

PLATFORM
GPL16477 Illumina Genome Analyzer (Nasonia vitripennis)

CITATIONS
23894324

