TITLE
Global transcriptome analysis of eukaryotic genes affected by Gromwell extract

ORGANISM
Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii H99

SUMMARY
BACKGROUND: Lithospermum erythrorhizon, popularly known as Gromwell, is a perennial herb belonging to the family of Boraginaceae and its extract is known to have diverse pharmacological, cosmetic, and nutritional values for human. Nevertheless the biological influence of Gromwell extract on general physiology of eukaryotic cells remains unknown. In this study, we for the first time performed a global transcriptome analysis by using DNA microarray analysis to identify genes affected by the addition of Gromwell extract (GE) by using a eukaryotic microorganism, basidiomycete fungus Cryptococcus neoformans, as a model system. RESULTS: The transcriptome analysis revealed that a total of 1932 genes are differentially regulated in a statistically significant manner and expressions of 715 genes are up- (315 genes) or down-regulated (457 genes) more than twofold upon GE treatment. In response to GE treatment, genes involved in signal transduction genes are immediately regulated and the evolutionarily conserved set of genes involved in the core cellular functions, including DNA replication, RNA transcription/processing, and protein translation/processing, are generally upregulated. In contrast, a number of genes involved in carbohydrate metabolism and transport, inorganic ion transport and metabolism, post-translational modification/protein turnover/chaperone functions, and signal transduction are downregulated by the GE treatment. Among the GE-responsive genes that are also evolutionarily conserved in the human genome, we confirmed expression patterns of YSA1, TPO2, FET5 (CFO1), and PZF1 by Northern blot analysis. Based on the functional characterization of some GE-responsive genes through phenotypic analysis of gene knockout mutants, we found that GE treatment may promote cellular tolerance against a variety of environmental stresses in eukaryotes. CONCLUSIONS: A significant portion of the Cryptococcus genome is affected in expression levels by treatment of GE, implying that the general physiology of eukaryotic cells is significantly affected by the GE treatment.

DESIGN
There are more than 95% of genome homology between JEC21 and H99. Therefore 6 slides of JEC21 (Cryptococcus neoformans var. neoformans serotype D) 70-mer oligo are used in this analysis, 3 biological replicate experiments are performed, total RNAs are extracted from H99 (H99 Wild type strain (Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii serotype A)) with 6.4 mg/ml Gromwell extract in 0, 10, 30, 60 min. We use the mixed all of total RNAs from this experiment as a control RNA. We use Cy3 as Sample dye and Cy5 as a control dye.

PLATFORM
GPL8638 Duke Cryptococcus neoformans serotype D (JEC21) 8K

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

