TITLE
Mouse Diversity Array SNP Genotyping of B10.BALBChr16 and BALB.B10Chr16 Reciprocal Consomic Strain Mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
To identify novel mechanisms regulating allogeneic hematopoietic cell engraftment, we previously used a forward genetic approach and described identification, in mice, of the Bmgr5 bone marrow (BM) engraftment quantitative trait locus (QTL).  This QTL confers dominant and large allele effects for engraftment susceptibility.  It was localized to chromosome 16 by classical quantitative genetic techniques in a segregating backcross bred from susceptible BALB.K and resistant B10.BR mice.  We now report verification of the Bmgr5 QTL using reciprocal chromosome 16 consomic strains.  The BM engraftment phenotype in these consomic mice shows that Bmgr5 susceptibility alleles are not only sufficient but also indispensable for conferring permissiveness for allogeneic BM engraftment.  Using panels of congenic mice, we resolved the Bmgr5 QTL into two separate subloci, termed Bmgr5a and Bmgr5b, each conferring permissiveness for the engraftment phenotype and both fine mapped to an interval amenable to positional cloning.  Candidate Bmgr5 genes were then prioritized using whole exome DNA sequencing and microarray gene expression profiling.  Further studies are needed to elucidate the genetic interaction between Bmgr5a and Bmgr5b and identify causative genes and underlying gene variants.  This may lead to new approaches for overcoming the problem of graft rejection in clinical hematopoietic cell transplantation.

DESIGN
B10.BALBChr16 and BALB.B10Chr16 consomic strain mice were constructed in our laboratory for validation of bone marrow engraftment and graft-vs-host diseaes QTLs.  The parental strains for consomic line construction were B10.BR (B10.BR-H2k H2-T18a/SgSnJJrep) and BALB.K (C.C3-H2k/LilMcdJ).  The JAX Mouse Diveristy 620K SNP Array was used to verify adequate removal of residual background heterozygosity.  Liver DNA was delivered to JAX Mouse Diversity Genotyping Array Service (Jackson Laboratory) for the SNP Array genotyping.

PLATFORM
GPL13147 [MOUSEDIVm520650] Affymetrix Mouse Diversity Genotyping Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

