TITLE
Expression analysis of  the gacS mutant of Pseudomonas fluorescens SBW25

ORGANISM
Pseudomonas fluorescens SBW25

SUMMARY
Pseudomonas species are ubiquitous in plant-associated environments and produce an array of volatiles, enzymes and antimicrobials. The biosynthesis of many metabolites is regulated by the GacS/GacA two-component regulatory system. Transcriptome analysis of Pseudomonas fluorescens SBW25 revealed that 702 genes were differentially regulated (fold change > 4, P < 0.0001) in a gacS::Tn5 mutant, with 300 and 402 genes up- and down-regulated, respectively. Genes that were significantly down-regulated are involved in viscosin biosynthesis (viscABC), protease production (aprA), motility, biofilm formation, and secretory systems. Genes that were significantly up-regulated are involved in siderophore biosynthesis and oxidative stress. In contrast to previous studies with gac-mutants of other Pseudomonas species/strains, the gacS mutant of SBW25 inhibited growth of oomycete, fungal and bacterial pathogens significantly more than parental strain SBW25. A potential candidate for this enhanced antimicrobial activity was a large nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) gene cluster predicted to encode for an 8-amino-acid ornicorrugatin-like peptide. Site-directed mutagenesis of an NRPS gene in this cluster, however, did not lead to a reduction in the antimicrobial activity of the gacS mutant. Collectively these results indicate that a mutation in the GacS/GacA regulatory system causes major transcriptional changes in P. fluorescens SBW25 and significantly enhances its antimicrobial activities by yet unknown mechanisms.

DESIGN
This expression study used total RNA recovered from four separate wild-type cultures of Pseudomonas fluorescens SBW25 and four separate cultures of the gacS mutant.  Expression design was based on the updated genome sequence of Pseudomonas fluorescens SBW25, NC_012660.1 and associated plasmid pQBR0476 with nineteen 60-mer probe  per gene.  Each probe is replicated 3 times.  The design includes random GC and other control probes.

PLATFORM
GPL16495 2007-01-11_Raaij_TI216595

CITATIONS
23864577

