TITLE
Inhibitory effects of galacturonic acid on Saccharomyces cerevisiae: involvement of hexose transporters

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
Aim: Analyse inhibitory effects of galacturonic acid, an important constituent of plant biomass hydrolysates, on growing and starving cultures of Saccharomyces cerevisiae CEN.PK113-7D.   Method & Results: Biomass yields in aerobic and anaerobic glucose-limited chemostat cultures (pH 3.5) were reduced by 25 and 10%, respectively, upon addition of 10 g∙l-1 galacturonic acid.  Genes previously reported to show a transcriptional response to other organic acids were overrepresented in a set of galacturonic-acid responsive genes identified by microarray analysis. These results suggested that galacturonic acid causes weak-acid uncoupling of the yeast plasma membrane pH gradient. Consistent with this hypothesis, galacturonate-accelerated loss of viability in starving cell suspensions was strongly pH dependent. Loss of viability was much slower in a strain in which all HXT (hexose transporter) genes were deleted. Moreover, deletion of HXT genes alleviated growth inhibition on ethanol observed at galacturonic acid concentrations of 10 g∙l-1 and above.  Conclusions: At low pH, galacturonic acid negatively affects the physiology of S. cerevisiae. Reduced sensitivity of hexose-transporter mutants indicated that one or more HXT transporters are involved in transport of galacturonic acid.    Significance and Impact: This study shows that galacturonic acid toxicity should be taken into account in process development for yeast-based fermentative conversion of pectin-rich feedstocks such as sugar beet pulp and citrus peel. Involvement of hexose transporters in galacturonic acid toxicity provides leads for improving tolerance.

DESIGN
To investigate the impact of galacturonic acid on S. cerevisiae, a DNA microarray-based transcriptome analysis was performed on aerobic, glucose-limited chemostat cultures grown in the presence and absence of 10 g∙l-1 galacturonic acid at pH3.5.

PLATFORM
GPL90 [YG_S98] Affymetrix Yeast Genome S98 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

