TITLE
The effects of a novel agrochemical in alleviating salinity stress

ORGANISM
Solanum lycopersicum

SUMMARY
Yield losses as a result of abiotic stress factors present a significant challenge for the future of global food production. While breeding technologies provide potential to combat negative stress-mediated outcomes over time, interventions which act to prime plant tolerance to stress, via the use of phytohormone-based elicitors for example, could act as a valuable tool for crop protection. However, the translation of fundamental biology into functioning solution is often constrained by knowledge-gaps. Photosynthetic and transcriptomic responses were characterised in young tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) seedlings in response to pre-treatment with a new plant health activator technology, ‘Alethea,’ followed by a subsequent 100 mM salinity stress. Salinity treatment led to a maximal 47% reduction in net photosynthetic rate 8 d following NaCl treatment. In Alethea pre-treated seedlings, sensitivity to salinity stress was markedly reduced during the experimental period. Microarray analysis of leaf transcriptional responses showed that while salinity stress and Alethea individually impacted on largely non-overlapping, distinct groups of genes, Alethea pre-treatment substantially modified the response to salinity. Alethea affected the expression of genes related to biotic stress, ethylene signalling, cell wall synthesis, redox signalling and photosynthetic processes.  Since Alethea had clear effects on photosynthesis/chloroplastic function at the physiological and molecular levels, we also investigated the ability of Alethea to protect plants against methyl viologen, a potent generator of oxidative stress in chloroplasts. Alethea pre-treatment produced dramatic reductions in visible foliar necrosis caused by methyl viologen compared with non-primed controls.

DESIGN
Tomato leaves from four groups of treated plants were harvested at a single point following treatment for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays. Plants came from two initial groups, pre-treated either with water (control) or the Alethea product. Equal numbers of plants from within these groups were subsequently treated either with water (control) or salinity (100 mM NaCl), generating 4 main experimental groups in a 2x2 factorial design. Samples were collected from 3 biological replicate experiments, and each sample included leaves pooled from 3 individual plants from each treatment group.

PLATFORM
GPL4741 [Tomato] Affymetrix Tomato Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

