TITLE
Transcriptional signature of progesterone-induced germinal vesicle breakdown in the fathead minnow ovary (Pimephales promelas)

ORGANISM
Pimephales promelas

SUMMARY
A growing number of studies have examined transcriptional responses to sex steroids along the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis in teleost fishes.  However, data is are lacking on the molecular signaling cascades that underlie progesterone signaling.  The objectives of the present study were to characterize the transcriptional response in the ovary of fathead minnow (Pimephales promelas) (FHM) in response to progesterone (P4) using transcriptomics.  Female FHM ovaries were exposed in vitro to 500 ng P4/L.  Germinal vesicle migration and breakdown (GVBD) was observed and microarrays were used to identify gene cascades affected by P4. Microarray analysis identified 1,265 differentially expressed transcripts after P4 treatment (p < 0.05).  Functional enrichment analysis revealed that transcripts involved in the molecular functions of protein serine/threonine kinase activity, ATP binding, and activity of calcium channels were increased in the female ovary after P4 treatment.  There was an overwhelming response of genes involved in structural constituent of ribosome to bethat were down-regulated with P4.  There was also evidence for gene changes in steroid and maturation-related transcripts.  Pathway analyses identified cell cycle regulation, insulin action, hedgehog, and B cell activation as pathways containing an over-representation of highly regulated transcripts.  Significant regulatory sub-networks of P4-mediated transcripts included genes regulated by tumor protein p53 and E2F transcription factor 1, suggesting that downstream expression targets of these two proteins may be preferentially involved in P4-mediated GVBD.  These data provide novel insight into the molecular signaling cascades that may underlie P4-signaling in the ovary and identifies genes and processes that may indicate premature GVBD due to environmental pollutants that mimic progestins.

DESIGN
3 control and 4 treatment; biological replicates

PLATFORM
GPL7282 EcoArray Fathead minnow 44K v1.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

