TITLE
CXCL12 Production by Early Mesenchymal Progenitors is Required for Hematopoietic Stem Cell Maintenance

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) primarily reside in the bone marrow where signals generated by stromal cells regulate their self-renewal, proliferation, and trafficking.  Endosteal osteoblasts and perivascular stromal cells including endothelial cells3, CXCL12-abundant reticular (CAR) cells, leptin-receptor positive stromal cells, and nestin-GFP positive mesenchymal progenitors have all been implicated in HSC maintenance.  However, it is unclear if specific hematopoietic progenitor cell (HPC) subsets reside in distinct niches defined by the surrounding stromal cells and the regulatory molecules they produce. CXCL12 (stromal-derived factor-1, SDF-1) regulates both HSCs and lymphoid progenitors and is expressed by all of these stromal cell populations. Here, we selectively deleted Cxcl12 from candidate niche stromal cell populations and characterized the effect on HPCs. Deletion of Cxcl12 from mineralizing osteoblasts has no effect on HSCs or lymphoid progenitors.  Deletion of Cxcl12 from osterix-expressing stromal cells, which includes CAR cells and osteoblasts, results in constitutive HPC mobilization and a loss of B lymphoid progenitors, but HSC function is normal. Cxcl12 deletion in endothelial cells results in a modest loss of long-term repopulating activity.  Strikingly, deletion of Cxcl12 in nestin-negative mesenchymal progenitors using Prx1-Cre is associated with a marked loss of HSCs, long-term repopulating activity, HSC quiescence, and common lymphoid progenitors.  These data suggest that osterix-expressing stromal cells comprise a distinct niche that supports B lymphoid progenitors and retains HPC in the bone marrow, while expression of CXCL12 from stromal cells in the perivascular region, including endothelial cells and mesenchymal progenitors, support HSCs.

DESIGN
Total of three samples of two groups analyzed. Replica samples of CXCL12-abundant reticular (CAR) cells from two CXCL12-GFP knock-in mice and a combined sample of PDGFRa+ Sca+ CD45- lineage- cells from three Prx1-Cre Rosa26Ai9/+ Cxcl12gfp/+ mice were used and analyzed.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
23434756

