TITLE
microRNA signature is altered in both human epididymis and seminal microvesicles following vasectomy.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
BACKGROUND: Vasectomized men who wish for restoration of fertility commonly face problems to conceive despite high surgical success rates of vasovasostomy, a surgery routinely used to retrieve duct patency. In human, vasectomy has consequences on the epididymal transcriptome and is responsible for non-reversible changes that affect the biochemical parameters and functions of ejaculated sperm in vasovasotomized men. Since microRNAs (miRNAs) are key regulators of post-transcriptional gene expression, we explored the consequences of vasectomy on miRNA pattern in the human epididymis and determined the repercussion and reversibility of these changes in seminal microvesicles (SMVs) from semen of vasovasostomized men. METHOD: miRNA signatures from a unique set of human epididymal segments (caput, corpus, cauda) provided by controls and vasectomized donors as well as miRNA content of SMVs isolated from semen of normal, vasectomized and vasovasostomized donors were determined by using high-throughput microarray technology. Epididymal miRNA signature was correlated with gene expression profiles by employing an integrated genomic approach. RESULTS: While the segmented pattern of miRNA expression was maintained along the human epididymis following vasectomy, the array of miRNAs from each anatomical region significantly differed between normal and vasectomized donors. Greatest changes were observed in cauda epididymidis and were negatively correlated with transcription factors. Vasectomy also impacted expression of miRNAs found in SMVs from normal donors, including miRNAs of epididymal origin contained in epididymosomes. Among seminal miRNAs sequelae, 52 were reversible according to miRNA expression level following duct patency retrieval. In contrast, 66 of miRNAs found in SMVs were not retrieved in SMVs after vasovasostomy. CONCLUSION: We showed that vasectomy has a substantial impact on the miRNA signature of the epididymis and SMVs, and that vasovasostomy does not restore all molecular players found in normal fertile individuals. According to the critical role played by miRNAs in the control of male fertility, we believe that miRNA sequelae occurring upstream and downstream of the vasectomy site may be in part responsible for the reduced fertility outcome reported after surgically successful vasectomy reversal.

DESIGN
Human epididymides from 3 control (26, 47 and 50 years old. GEO accession number GSE35522) and 3 vasectomized donors (45, 47 and 48 years old), were collected and dissected into 3 anatomical regions (caput, corpus and cauda). Seminal microvesicles (SMVs) were isolated from the semen of normal (pool of 3 donnors), vasectomized (pool of 3 donnors) and vasovasostomized donors (pool of 5 donnors). A cross-comparison between the miRNA signature found in different segments and seminal vesicles was performed using GeneChip miRNA Array 2.0 (Affimetrix, Santa Clara, CA).

PLATFORM
GPL8786 [miRNA-1] Affymetrix Multispecies miRNA-1 Array GPL14613 [miRNA-2] Affymetrix Multispecies miRNA-2 Array

CITATIONS
23539611

