TITLE
Pervasive and dynamic protein binding sites of the mRNA transcriptome in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
Protein-RNA interactions are integral components of nearly every aspect of biology including regulation of gene expression, assembly of cellular architectures, and pathogenesis of human diseases. However, studies in the past few decades have only uncovered a small fraction of the vast landscape of the protein-RNA interactome in any organism, and even less is known about the dynamics of protein-RNA interactions under changing developmental and environmental conditions. Here, we describe the gPAR-CLIP (global photoactivatable-ribonucleoside-enhanced crosslinking and immunopurification) approach for capturing regions of the transcriptome bound by RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) in budding yeast. We report over 13,000 RBP crosslinking sites in untranslated regions (UTR) covering 72% of protein-coding transcripts encoded in the genome, confirming 3’ UTRs as major sites for RBP interaction. Comparative genomic analyses reveal that RBP crosslinking sites are highly conserved, and RNA folding predictions indicate that secondary structural elements are constrained by protein binding and may serve as generalizable modes of RNA recognition. Finally, 38% of 3’ UTR crosslinking sites show changes in RBP occupancy upon glucose or nitrogen deprivation, with major impacts on metabolic pathways as well as mitochondrial and ribosomal gene expression. Our study offers an unprecedented view of the pervasiveness and dynamics of protein-RNA interactions in vivo.

DESIGN
Duplicate gPAR-CLIP and mRNA-seq libraries were sequenced from yeast strains for each of three conditions: log-phase growth, growth after 2 hour glucose starvation, and growth after 2 hour nitrogen starvation. Additional duplicate mRNA-seq libraries were sequenced from yeast strains grown in the absence of 4-thiouracil. gPAR-CLIP libraries were used to determine regions of mRNA bound by proteins. mRNA-seq libraries served as controls for mRNA abundance. A Puf3p PAR-CLIP library was sequenced to determine how well gPAR-CLIP captured the binding signatures of a single RNA-binding protein.

PLATFORM
GPL13821 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)

CITATIONS
23409723

