TITLE
Two histone deacetylases, FfHda1 and FfHda2, are important for secondary metabolism and virulence in Fusarium fujikuroi

ORGANISM
Fusarium fujikuroi

SUMMARY
Histone modifications have been shown to be crucial for secondary metabolism in various filamentous fungi. Here we studied the influence of histone acetylation on secondary metabolite production in the phytopathogenic fungus Fusarium fujikuroi, a known producer of several secondary metabolites including pigments and mycotoxins. Deletion of the classical HDACs FfHdF1, FfHdF2 and FfHdF3 indicated that FfHdF1 and FfHdF2 are major regulators of secondary metabolism, whereas FfHdF3 is involved in developmental processes but dispensable for secondary metabolite production in F. fujikuroi. Microarray analysis with the major HDAC FfHdF2 revealed differential regulation of several secondary metabolite gene clusters, subsequently verified by a combination of chemical and biological approaches. These results indicate that HDACs are responsible for gene silencing but also gene activation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays with ΔffhdF2 revealed significant alterations regarding the acetylation state in the landscape of secondary metabolite gene clusters thereby providing insights into the regulatory mechanism. In addition, the class I HDAC FfHdF1 also has major impact on secondary metabolism in F. fujikuroi. Furthermore, deletion of both ffhdF1 and ffhdF2 resulted in de-repression of secondary metabolites under normally repressing conditions. Thus, manipulation of HDAC encoding genes might provide a powerful tool for the activation of cryptic secondary metabolites. Investigation of whole genome gene expression of the Fusarium fujikuroi wild type IMI58289, ΔffhdF2 mutant under nitrogen starvation and nitrogen sufficient conditions.

DESIGN
In this study we hybridized in total 12 microarrays using total RNA recovered from a wild-type culture of F. fujikuroi IMI58289 and ΔffhdF2 mutant culture. All cultures were grown on a 6 mM Gln (10%) and a 60 mM Gln medium (100%). For each combination of culture and medium a biological replicate was created. Each chip measures the expression level of 14,397 genes from F. fujikuroi IMI58289 with eight 60-mer probes.

PLATFORM
GPL16553 Fusarium fujikuroi annotation version 1 gene expression array [110407_UG_Ffujikuroi_expr_HX12]

CITATIONS
24096420

