TITLE
Expression data of breast tumors in MMTV-PyMT+ female mice treated with DPM or vehicle

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Dipyridamole (DPM) is widely used to prevent strokes and vascular thrombosis. Combination therapy of DPM and antimetabolites has shown synergistic anticancer activity. This study investigated the chemopreventive effects of DPM in the mouse mammary tumor virus promoter driven polyoma middle T oncoprotein (MMTV-PyMT) metastatic breast cancer model. We also investigated the effects of DPM on gene and miRNA expression. Chemopreventive activity was assessed by comparing the time to onset of palpable lesions, primary tumor growth kinetics and the number of lung metastases in transgenic mice treated with DPM or vehicle. Gene expression and microRNA (miRNA) expression profiles of mammary tumor tissues were then analyzed using the Affymetrix GeneChip® or miRNA 2.0 arrays. Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) was used to confirm changes in gene expression. Treatment with DPM beginning at the age of four weeks delayed the  onset of palpable lesions, delayed tumor progression and suppressed lung metastasis. Microarray gene expression analysis identified 253 genes differentially expressed between DPM-treated and control mammary tumors. miRNA expression analysis revealed that 53 miRNAs were altered by DPM treatment. The results indicate that DPM has chemoprevention activity against breast cancer tumorigenesis and metastasis in mice. The array analyses provide insights into potential mechanisms of DPM’s chemopreventive effects, involving upregulation of several genes and miRNAs known to suppress cancer growth and/or metastasis and downregulation of genes known to promote cancer. Some of these genes have not been previously studied in breast cancer and may serve as novel molecular targets for breast cancer chemoprevention.

DESIGN
MMTV-PyMT+ female mice were randomly divided into a DPM treatment group (n=10 mice, total of 100 glands) and a vehicle (control) group (n=7 mice, total of 70 glands). When mice were four weeks old, when hyperplasia lesions begin to develop in the FVB strain (21), DPM (10 mg/kg) or vehicle was injected IP into the peritoneum of each mouse on a 5 days on/2 days off dosing schedule for a total of 11 weeks (week one=injection one), until mice were 15 weeks of age. Each of the 10 mammary tumors per mouse was monitored until the study end point. A total six breast tumor RNA samples were used for microarray analysis, with three form mice treated with DPM and three from mice treated with vehicle.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
23447563

