TITLE
Transcriptional profiling of nhr-114 vs. glp-1 animals, and wild type + Trp vs. wild type animals.

ORGANISM
Caenorhabditis elegans

SUMMARY
Animals can thrive on variable food resources as a result of autonomous processes and beneficial relationships with their gut microbes. Food intake elicits major physiological changes, which are compensated with transient systemic responses that maintain homeostasis in the organism. This integration of external information occurs through cellular sensory elements, such as nuclear receptors, which modulate gene expression in response to specific cues. Given the importance of the germline stem cells (GSCs) for the development of the germ line and the continuity of the species, it is reasonable to assume that GSCs might be shielded from the negative influence of environmental perturbations. To our knowledge, however, there are no mechanisms reported that protect proliferating germ cells from harmful dietary metabolites. Using Caenorhabditis elegans as a model, we report that the somatic activity of the conserved nuclear receptor nhr-114/HNF4 protects GSC divisions and GSC integrity from dietary metabolites. In the absence of nhr-114 and on certain bacterial diets, otherwise somatically normal animals accumulate germ cell division defects during development and become sterile. We find that in nhr-114(-) animals the induction of germline defects and sterility depends on the bacterial metabolic status with respect to the essential amino acid tryptophan. This illustrates an animal-microbe interaction in which somatic nuclear receptor activity preserves the germline by buffering against dietary metabolites, likely through a somatic detoxifying response. Overall, our findings uncover an unprecedented and presumably evolutionary conserved soma-to-germline axis of communication that maintains reproductive robustness on variable food resources.

DESIGN
Trasncriptional profiles of adult sterile nhr-114(RNAi) animals were compared to those of sterile glp-1(q224ts) animals. Independently, the transcriptional profiles of wild type animals fed an OP50 diet supplemented with Tryptophan was compared to wild type animals fed a standard OP50 diet.

PLATFORM
GPL16565 Agilent-037908 Sider C. elegans 60K

CITATIONS
23499532

