TITLE
Long term intake of pea fiber affects the colonic barrier, bacterial and transcriptional profile using pig as model

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
The aim of this study was to investigate whether long term intake of pea fiber would improve colonic barrier, bacterial profile and alter colonic gene expression using DNA microarray. Fifty weaned pigs were randomly allocated into 2 groups receiving control and fibrous diet with inclusion of pea fiber from weaning age until d 160. The two diets had similar nutrient levels. Pigs fed pea fiber diet (PF diet) had markedly decreased overall average daily feed intake (ADFI) and Feed:Gain in growing and finishing period (P < 0.05). In addition, long term intake of PF diet induced deeper crypt  (+50 %, P < 0.05), increased protein expression of colonic mucin and sIgA (+13～16 %, P < 0.05). Resulting from the increased lactobacillus content (P < 0.05), moreover, pigs fed PF diet had significantly higher concentration of colonic total short chain fatty acid (SCFA) and acetic acid. DNA microarray results indicated that feeding PF diet induced alterations in the expression of colonic cancer, immune response and lipid metabolism-related genes, as well as genes involved in signal pathway such as intestinal immune network for IgA production, PPAR signaling pathway and nutrient metabolism-related pathways. Collectively, our results suggested that long term intake of PF diet would improve colonic health via altering colonic bacteria profile, colonic barriers, immune and metabolism related protein or gene expressions.

DESIGN
A total of 50 weaned pigs (Duroc×Landrace×Yorkshire, initial body weight: 7.2±0.5 kg) were randomly allocated to 2 groups with 5 pens each group and 5 pig each pen.  Pigs were fed control (Control) and fibrous diets (10～20 % inclusion of pea fiber, PF) from weaning at 28 day  to 160 day-old-age, which is subjected to phase feeding by weaning diet (weaning to d 30 post-weaning), growing diet (d 30～90 postweaning) and finishing diet  (d 90～160 postweaning) according to their physiological stage. At d 160 postweaning, four pigs each group were selected to be slaughtered for collection of colonic tissues and DNA microarray was applied to the colonic tissues for analysis of gene expression.

PLATFORM
GPL16571 Agilent-026440 Sus scrofa (Pig) Oligo Microarray v2 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

