TITLE
Prominin 1/CD133 Endothelium Sustains Growth of Proneural Glioma

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
As many other tumors, a subset of gliobastoma is thought to be maintained by a restricted population of cancer cells, stem-like cells that express CD133 transmembrane protein. Expression levels of CD133 gene has been linked to a poor prognostic molecular subgroup and is not overexpressed by the PDGF-driven proneural group. Thus, the significance of CD133+ cells for gliomagenesis of the proneural group is undetermined. In addition, the role of the CD133 protein remains elusive and controversial, which results from the difficult isolation of CD133+ cells that has largely relied on the use of antibodies to ill-defined glycosylated epitopes of CD133. Here, we used a knockin lacZ reporter mouse, Prom1lacZ/+, to track Prom1+ cells in the brain and found that Prom1 (prominin1, murine CD133 homologue) is expressed by cells that co-express markers characteristic of neuronal, glial and vascular lineage phenotype. In proneural tumors derived from injection of RCAS-PDGF into the brain of tv-a;Ink4a-Arf-/- Prom1lacZ/+ mice, Prom1+ cells co-express markers for astrocytes and endothelial cells. Therefore, we characterize the tumor propagation in a murine model and found that the mice co-transplanted with Prom1 endothelium and proneural tumor spheres cells had significant tumor burden and vascular proliferation (angiogenesis). Specific genes in Prom1 endothelium are identified that code for endothelial signaling modulators that most likely support proneural tumor progression and can be potential targets for anti-angiogenic therapy.

DESIGN
Cells were sorted via FACS to obtain a population of CD31+CD133- cells and a population of CD31+CD133+ cells. Total RNA was extracted from each population and gene expression was assayed on Affymetrix Mouse 430 2.0 arrays with one array per cell population.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

