TITLE
High-resolution gene copy number and expression profiling of human chromosome 22 in ovarian carcinomas

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
This set contains the aCGH data for the publication. Previous low-resolution studies of chromosome 22 in ovarian carcinoma have suggested its involvement in the development of the disease. We report a high-resolution analysis of DNA copy number and gene expression of 22q in 18 ovarian carcinomas using a 22q-specific genomic microarray. We identified aberrations in 67% of the studied tumors, which displayed 3 distinct gene copy number profiles. The majority of the cases (11 of 18) demonstrated heterozygous terminal deletions of various sizes, the smallest of which was 3.5 Mb. The second profile, detected in 3 tumors, revealed the coexistence of heterozygous deletions and different patterns of low-copy-number gain that involved the proximal half of 22q. The latter finding has not been reported previously in ovarian carcinoma. One case displayed a continuous deletion encompassing the entire 22q, consistent with monosomy 22. Furthermore, we compared the results with the available data on these tumors by using cDNA microarrays to define the degree of correlation between abnormalities at the DNA level and variation in mRNA expression. By a comparison with the expression data, we were able to identify 21 deleted genes showing low mRNA levels and 12 amplified genes displaying elevated gene expression, several of which play roles in cell cycle control and the induction of apoptosis. Our results indicated significant correlation between DNA copy number aberrations and variation in mRNA expression. We also identified several regions and candidate genes on 22q that should be studied further to determine their role in the development of ovarian cancer. Set of arrays organized by shared biological context, such as organism, tumors types, processes, etc. Keywords: Logical Set, arrayCGH

DESIGN
Computed

PLATFORM
GPL3332 SHEJ GPL3522 SHDW GPL3523 SHEG GPL3524 SHEH GPL3528 SHDZ

CITATIONS
15578687

