TITLE
Identification of heat stress-targets of translational control by large scale analysis of Arabidopsis trancriptome and translatome.

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Heat stress is one of the most prominent and deleterious environmental threads affecting plant growth and development. Upon high temperatures, plants launch specialized gene expression programs that promote stress protection and survival. These programs involve global and specific changes at the transcriptional and translational levels. However the coordination of these processes and their specific role in the establishment of the heat stress response is not fully elucidated. In this report, we have carried out a genome-wide analysis to simultaneously monitor the individual changes in the transcriptional and translational mRNA levels of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings after the exposure to a heat shock stress. Our results demonstrated that, superimposed to transcription, translation exerts a wide but dual regulation of gene expression. For the majority of mRNAs, translation is severely repressed, causing a decreased of 50% of the association of the bulk of mRNAs to polysomes. However, some relevant mRNAs involved in different aspects of homeostasis maintenance follow a differential pattern of translation. Analysis of the sequence of the differentially translated mRNAs unravels that some features, like the 5´UTR G+C content and the cDNA length, may take part in the discrimination mechanisms for mRNA polysome loading.  Among the differential translated genes stand out master regulators of the stress response, highlighting the main role of translation in the early establishment of physiological response of plants to elevated temperatures.

DESIGN
In total 8 ATH1 Affymetrix GeneChips were hybridized with all combinations of two factors: total mRNA/polysome-bound-RNA; 22ºC/38ºC. Two biological replicates per sample type were performed.

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
23977042

