TITLE
Gene expression profiling to recognize specific features of non-genotoxic carcinogens

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The current test strategy for carcinogenicity is generally based on in vitro and in vivo genotoxicity assays. Non-genotoxic carcinogens (NGTXC) are negative for genotoxicity and go undetected. Therefore, alternative tests to detect these chemicals are urgently needed. NGTXC act through different modes of action, which complicates the development of such assays. We have demonstrated recently in primary mouse hepatocytes that some, but certainly not all, NGTXC can be categorized according to their mode of action based on feature detection at a gene expression level (Schaap et al. 2012 (PMID 22710402)). Identification of a wider range of chemicals probably requires multiple in vitro systems. In the current study, we describe the added value of using mouse embryonic stem cells. In this study, the focus is on NGTXC, but we also included genotoxic carcinogens and non-carcinogens. This approach enables us to assess the robustness of this method and to evaluate the system for recognizing features of chemicals in general, which is important for application in future risk assessment.

DESIGN
Primary mouse hepatocytes and mouse embryonic stem cells were exposed to 26 chemicals (non-genotoxic carcinogens and non-carcinogens) representing diverse modes of action. Upon profiling, an unsupervised comparison approach was applied to recognize similar features at the transcriptomic level. This Series consists of the gene expression data of the primary mouse hepatocytes. The expression data of the mouse embryonic stem cells is submitted separately under another accession number. In this study we tested 26 chemicals of which 16 non-genotoxic carcinogens, 4 genotoxic carcinogens, 2 genotoxic non-carcinogens and 4 non-carcinogens. Specification of the chemicals can be found in the readme file.

PLATFORM
GPL15125 [HT_MG-430_PM] Affymetrix HT MG-430 PM Array Plate [CDF: mouse4302daiplusv6cdf]

CITATIONS
25270620

