TITLE
Hypothalamic gene expression of appetite regulators in a cancer-cachectic mouse model [Dataset 2]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Appetite is frequently affected in cancer patients, leading to anorexia and consequently insufficient food intake. In this study, we report on hypothalamic gene expression profile of a cancer cachectic mouse model with increased food intake. In this model, mice bearing C26 colon adenocarcinoma have an increased food intake subsequently to the loss of body weight. We hypothesize that in this model, appetite regulating systems in the hypothalamus, which apparently fail in anorexia, are still able to adapt adequately to changes in energy balance. Therefore studying the changes that occur on appetite regulators in the hypothalamus might reveal targets for treatment of cancer-induced eating disorders. By applying transcriptomics, many appetite regulating systems in the hypothalamus could be taken into account, providing an overview of changes that occur in the hypothalamus during tumour growth. We show that hypothalamic expression of orexigenic neuropeptides NPY and AgRP was higher, whereas expression of anorexigenic genes CCK and POMC were lower in TB compared to controls. In addition, serotonin and dopamine signalling pathways were found to be significantly altered in TB mice. Serotonin levels in brain showed to be lower in TB mice compared to control mice, while dopamine levels did not change. Moreover, serotonin levels inversely correlated with food intake. Transcriptomic analysis of the hypothalamus of cachectic TB mice with an increased food intake showed changes in NPY, AgRP and serotonin signalling. Serotonin levels in the brain showed to correlate with changes in food intake. Targeting these systems seems a promising strategy to avoid the development of cancer-induced eating disorders.

DESIGN
C26-colon adenocarcinoma cells were subcutaneously inoculated in CDF1 mice. After 20 days, hypothalami were dissected and subjected to gene expression profiling. The total dataset consists of 2 parts; dataset 1, a pilot stuy in which mice were injected with increasing number of tumour cells and pooled samples were arrayed; and dataset 2, the main study in which mice were injected with 1 million tumour cells and samples were individually arrayed.

