TITLE
Comparison of transcriptional profiles of PBMCs from HIV-infected rapid progressors and chronic progressors

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
A significant percentage of HIV-infected individuals experience a sharp decline in CD4+ T cell counts and progress to AIDS quickly after primary infection. Identification of biomarkers distinguishing rapid progressors (RPs) versus chronic progressors (CPs) is critical for early clinical intervention and could provide novel strategies to facilitate vaccine design and immune therapy. mRNA and miRNA expression profiles in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of RPs and CPs were investigated at 111±22 days (Mean±SD) of HIV infection. The association of mRNA and miRNA expression with disease progression was examined by receiver operating characteristic analysis and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. Pathway enrichment analysis showed that genes with deregulated expression in RPs are primarily involved in apoptosis pathways. Furthermore, we found that 5 miRNAs (miR-31, -200c, -526a, -99a and -503) in RPs were significantly decreased compared to those in CPs (P < 0.05). The decreased expression of these miRNAs was associated with rapid disease progression of HIV infection with a 94% predictive value as measured by the area under the curve. The upregulated predicted targets from the 5 signature miRNAs and all upregulated genes identified from mRNA microarray converged to the apoptosis pathway. Moreover, overexpression of miR-31 in primary human T cells promoted their survival. Our results have identified a distinct transcriptomic signature in PBMCs of RPs and provided novel insights to the pathogenesis of HIV infection.

DESIGN
A cohort of primary HIV infected individuals with different disease outcome were enrolled in this study. We included 6 individuals with rapid disease progression (RP), seven with chronic disease progression (CP). The HIV infected individuals were never on therapy before the time of sample taken.

PLATFORM
GPL16025 NimbleGen Homo sapiens Expression Array [100718_HG18_opt_expr]

CITATIONS
23592504

