TITLE
Allele-specific maps of RNA polymerase II phosphorylated at serine 5 in mouse cultured hybrid cells and mouse hybrid brain

ORGANISM
Mus musculus x Mus spretus

SUMMARY
We report the application of single-molecule-based sequencing technology for high-throughput profiling of RNA polymerase II phosphorylated at serine 5 (PolII-S5p; the transcription initiation form) in female mouse cultured hybrid cells and female hybrid brain derived from mouse systems with skewed X inactivation based on crosses between C57BL/6J (BL6) and M. spretus. In these systems, alleles can be differentiated by frequent SNPs between mouse species, and the active X (Xa) compared to the haploid set of autosomes from the same species. To examine PolII-S5p occupancy in vivo, ChIP-seq was done in brain from an adult female F1 mouse in which the BL6 X is always active and the spretus X inactive. Uniquely mapped reads containing informative SNPs were assigned to each haploid chromosome set (BL6 or spretus) and were counted to establish allele-specific PolII-S5p occupancy profiles. We found that PolII-S5p allele-specific occupancy with or without normalization by input genomic DNA sequencing data showed that expressed genes on the Xa ( > 1RPKM) had 30% higher PolII-S5p peak levels at their promoters compared to autosomal genes from the same species (BL6). This result was confirmed by performing an independent allele-specific ChIP-seq analysis on fibroblasts derived from embryonic kidney (Patski cell line) that have the opposite X inactivation pattern from the brain sample, i.e. an Xa from M. spretus and an Xi from BL6. These findings suggest that transcription initiation of X-linked genes is enhanced to contribute to X upregulation in cell lines and in vivo.

DESIGN
Examination of allele-specific PolII-S5p occupancy in mouse hybrid cells and brain.

PLATFORM
GPL16616 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus x Mus spretus) GPL16617 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Mus musculus x Mus spretus)

CITATIONS
23523075

