TITLE
CG methylated microarrays identify novel methylated sequence bound by the CEBPB|ATF4 heterodimer that are active in vivo

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
To evaluate the effect of CG methylation on DNA binding of sequence-specific B-ZIP transcription factors (TFs) in a high-throughput manner, we enzymatically methylated the cytosine in the CG dinucleotide on protein binding microarrays. Two Agilent DNA array designs were used. One contained 40,000 features using de Bruijn sequences where each 8-mer occurs 32 times in various positions in the DNA sequence. The second contained 180,000 features with each CG containing 8-mer present three times. The first design was better for identification of binding motifs, while the second was better for quantification. Using this novel technology, we show that CG methylation enhanced binding for CEBPA and CEBPB and inhibited binding for CREB, ATF4, JUN, JUND, CEBPD and CEBPG. The CEBPB|ATF4 heterodimer bound a novel motif CGAT|GCAA 10-fold better when methylated. EMSA confirmed these results. CEBPB ChIP-seq data using primary female mouse dermal fibroblasts with 50X methylome coverage for each strand indicate that the methylated sequences well-bound on the arrays are also bound in vivo. CEBPB bound 39% of the methylated canonical 10-mers ATTGC|GCAAT in the mouse genome. After ATF4 protein induction by thapsigargin which results in ER stress, CEBPB binds methylated CGAT|GCAA in vivo, recapitulating what was observed on the arrays. This methodology can be used to identify new methylated DNA sequences preferentially bound by TF, which may be functional in vivo.

DESIGN
Protein binding microarray (PBM) experiments were performed for a set of 8 mouse B-ZIP homodimers and one hetrodimer transcription factors. Briefly, the PBMs involved binding GST-tagged DNA-binding proteins to double-stranded and methylated or unmethylated 44K Agilent microarrays, containing a DeBruijn sequence design, in order to determine their sequence preferences. Details of the PBM protocol are described in Berger et al., Nature Biotechnology 2006.

PLATFORM
GPL11260 Agilent custom ME and HK design array [8mer] GPL16685 Agilent custom 180K MA array platform

CITATIONS
23590861

