TITLE
Effect of Notch1 pathway activation on high-grade glioma cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In this study, we explored the transcriptomic consequences of strong activation of the Notch pathway in embryonic human neural stem cells and in gliomas. For this we used a forced expression of the Notch intracellular domain (NICD). Glioblastoma multiforms (GBMs) are highly vascularized brain tumors containing a subpopulation of multipotent cancer stem cells. These cells closely interact with endothelial cells in neurovascular niches. In this study we have uncovered a close link between the Notch1 pathway and the tumoral vascularization process of GBM stem cells. We observed that although the Notch1 receptor was activated, the typical target proteins (HES5, HEY1, HEY2) were not or barely expressed in two explored GBM stem cell cultures. Notch1 signalling activation by expression of the intracellular form (NICD) in these cells was found to reduce their growth rate and migration which was accompanied by the sharp reduction of neural stem cell transcription factor expression (ASCL1, OLIG2, SOX2) while HEY1/2, KLF9, SNAI2 transcription factors were upregulated. Expression of OLIG2 and growth were restored after termination of Notch1 stimulation.  Remarkably, NICD expression induced the expression of pericyte cell markers (NG2, PDGFRb and a-smooth muscle actin (aSMA)) in GBM stem cells. This was paralleled with the induction of several angiogenesis-related factors most notably cytokines (HB-EGF, IL8, PLGF), metalloprotease (MMP9) and adhesion proteins (VCAM-1, ICAM-1, ITGA9). In xenotransplantation experiments, contrasting with the infiltrative and poorly-vascularized tumors obtained with control GBM stem cells, Notch1 stimulation resulted in poorly-disseminating but highly-vascularized grafts containing large vessels with lumen. Notch1-stimulated GBM cells expressed pericyte cell markers and closely associated with endothelial cells. These results reveal an important role for the Notch1 pathway in regulating GBM stem cell plasticity and angiogenic properties.

DESIGN
Embryonic human neural progenitors obtained from Lonza, the U87 glioma cell line, and glioma cancer stem cells (Gb4 and Gb7) characterized in Guichet et al. (Glia, 2013, 61(2), 225-39) were infected with lentiviruses expressing YFP or YFP-IRES-NICD (activated form of Notch receptor). After 48h, RNA were extracted for Affymetrix microarray analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL11532 [HuGene-1_1-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.1 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
24898819

