TITLE
Directed shotgun proteomics guided by RNA-Seq identifies a complete expressed prokaryotic proteome

ORGANISM
Bartonella henselae

SUMMARY
Prokaryotes are, due to their moderate complexity, particularly amenable to the comprehensive identification of the protein repertoire expressed under different conditions. We applied a generic strategy to identify a complete expressed prokaryotic proteome, which is based on the analysis of RNA and proteins extracted from matched samples. Saturated transcriptome profiling by RNA-seq provided an endpoint estimate of the protein-coding genes expressed under two conditions which mimic the interaction of Bartonella henselae with its mammalian host. Directed shotgun proteomics experiments were carried out on four subcellular fractions. By specifically targeting proteins which are short, basic, low abundant and membrane localized, we could eliminate their initial under-representation compared to the estimated endpoint. A total of 1,250 proteins were identified with an estimated false discovery rate below 1%. This represents 85% of all distinct annotated proteins and around 90% of the expressed protein-coding genes. Genes, whose transcripts were detected, but not their corresponding protein products, were found highly enriched in several genomic islands. Additionally, genes that lacked an ortholog and a functional annotation were not detected at the protein level, and possibly include over-predicted genes in genome annotations. Furthermore, a dramatic membrane proteome re-organization was observed including differential regulation of autotransporters, adhesins and hemin binding proteins. Particularly noteworthy was the complete membrane proteome coverage which included expression of all members of the VirB/D4 type IV secretion system, a key virulence factor.

DESIGN
Transcriptome and proteome analysis of B.henselae in two conditions and duplicates: uninduced and induced for host invasion.

PLATFORM
GPL16712 AB SOLiD 4 System (Bartonella henselae)

CITATIONS
23878158

