TITLE
Differential Molecular Effects of Imiglucerase and Velaglucerase Alfa in Gaucher Disease Mice [RNA-Seq]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Gaucher disease type 1 is an inborn error of metabolic disease with the defective activity of the lysosomal enzyme acid b-glucosidase (GCase). Enzyme replacement/reconstitution therapy (ERT), infusions with purified recombinant GCases, is efficacious in reversing hematologic, hepatic, splenic, and bony disease manifestations in Gaucher type 1 patients. However, the tissue specific molecular events in Gaucher disease and their response to therapy are not known yet. To explore the molecular events underlying GCase treatment, we evaluated the tissue-specific gene expression profiles and molecular responses in our Gaucher disease mouse model, which were treated with two FDA approved commercially available GCases, imiglucerase (imig) and velaglucerase alfa (vela). Using microarray and mRNA-Seq techniques, differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in the spleen and liver by the direct comparison of imig- vs. vela- treated mice. Among them three gene expression networks were derived from these spleens: 1) cell division/proliferation, 2) hematopoietic system and 3) inflammatory/macrophage response. Our study showed the occurrence of differential molecular pathophysiologic processes in the mice treated with imig compared with vela even though these two biosimilars had the same histological and biochemical efficacy

DESIGN
9V/null mice (Gaucher mouse model) were injected weekly via tail vein with 60U/kg/wk of imig or vela for 8 wks. To understand the molecular events underlying GCase treatment, we evaluated the tissue-specific gene expression profiles and molecular responses in our Gaucher disease mouse model, which were treated with two FDA approved commercially available GCases, imiglucerase (imig) and velaglucerase alfa (vela).

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

