TITLE
Single cell transcriptome analysis of Arabidopsis roots inoculated by Plasmodiophora brassicae indicates a role for brassinosteroids in clubroot formation.

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
The clubroot disease caused by the obligate biotrophic protist Plasmodiophora brassicae on host plants of the Brassicaceae family is characterized by enhanced cell division and cell expansion. Since a typical root section of an infected plant always includes different stages of the pathogen as well as uninfected cells, we were interested to investigate specific developmental stages of the pathogen and their effect on host transcriptional changes. We extended previous microarray studies on whole roots by using Laser Microdissection and Pressure Catapulting (LMPC) to isolate individual cells harboring defined developmental stages of the pathogen. In addition, we compared the central cylinder of infected to contol plants. We were especially interested to elucidate the stage-specific hormonal network. The upregulation of genes involved in auxin and cytokinin metabolism and signaling was confirmed. In addition, we found evidence that brassinosteroid (BR) synthesis and signal perception was in many cases upregulated in enlarged cells and the central cylinder. This was confirmed by qPCR and mutant analysis of the BR receptor mutant bri1-6, which exhibited less severe gall formation than the respective wild type. Our results identify novel hormone pathways involved in clubroot development. Using this method of single cell preparation combined with transcriptome analysis has been very useful to elucidate the regulation of gall growth by this obligate biotropic pathogen in a cell- and stage-specific manner.

DESIGN
Transcription profiling was performed in isolated Arabidopsis thaliana root cells harboring different developmental stages of Plasmodiophora brassicae at two time points after inoculation (dai) (14 and 21 dai), as well as in infected central cylinder tissue from roots at 14 dai (days after inoculation). Control samples were taken from uninfected roots. Host cells were dissected from paraffin embedded roots using Laser Microdissection and Pressure Catapulting (LMPC). 8 samples have been analyzed.

PLATFORM
GPL6177 Agilent-015059 Arabidopsis 3 Oligo Microarray 4x44K G2519F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
24285749

