TITLE
Evidence of a critical role for cellodextrin transporter 2 (CDT-2) in both cellulose and hemicellulose degradation and utilization in Neurospora crassa

ORGANISM
Neurospora crassa

SUMMARY
CDT-1 and CDT-2 are two cellodextrin transporters discovered in the filamentous fungus Neurospora crassa. Previous studies focused on characterizing the role of these transporters in only a few conditions, including cellulose degradation, and the function of these two transporters is not yet completely understood. In this study, we show that deletion of cdt-2, but not cdt-1, results in growth defects not only on Avicel but also on xylan. cdt-2 can be highly induced by xylan, and this mutant has a xylodextrin consumption defect. Transcriptomic analysis of the cdt-2 deletion strain on Avicel and xylan showed that major cellulase and hemicellulase genes were significantly down-regulated in the cdt-2 deletion strain and artificial over expression of cdt-2 in N. crassa increased cellulase and hemicellulase production. Together, these data clearly show that CDT-2 plays a critical role in hemicellulose sensing and utilization. This is the first time a sugar transporter has been assigned a function in the hemicellulose degradation pathway. Furthermore, we found that the transcription factor XLR-1 is the major regulator of cdt-2, while cdt-1 is primarily regulated by CLR-1. These results deepen our understanding of the functions of both cellodextrin transporters, particularly for CDT-2. Our study also provides novel insight into the mechanisms for hemicellulose sensing and utilization in N. crassa, and may be applicable to other cellulolytic filamentous fungi.

DESIGN
N. crassa was pregrown in Sucrose and transferred to Avicel (cellulose) or Xylan(hemicellulose) media. Up regulated and down regulated genes expressions were compared with wild type strain on two conditions (Avicel and xylan) respectively.

PLATFORM
GPL16164 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Neurospora crassa)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

