TITLE
Transcriptome during autoregulation of mycorrhization in soybean

ORGANISM
Glycine max

SUMMARY
The autoregulation of mycorrhization (AOM) describes a plant regulatory mechanism that limits the number of infection events by arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. The key signal mediator is a receptor kinase (GmNARK) that acts in the shoots. Early signals of the mycorrhizal symbiosis induce a root-derived signal that activates GmNARK in the shoot finally leading to a systemic repression of subsequent infections in the root. So far, less is known about the signals down-stream of GmNARK.  To find genes regulated by GmNARK in a mycorrhiza-dependent as well as in a mycorrhiza-independent manner, we used the Affymetrix GeneChip for soybean.    In general, mycorrhizal root systems consist of both colonized and non-colonized, but autoregulated roots. To physically separate those two root types for transcript analysis of specifically regulated genes, we used the split-root system.   Transcript profiling during AOM was done with material of Bragg wild-type and of the nark mutant nts1007, either non-inoculated or partially inoculated with the mycorrhizal fungus Rhizophagus irregularis (formerly Glomus intraradices). Wild-type and nark mutants were inoculated with R. irregularis on one half of the root-systems (root-parts " A " ) only. The remaining half of the root-systems stayed non-infected (root-parts " B " ). Corresponding controls stayed completely non-infected. Gene expression was analyzed in inoculated root-parts, non-inoculated root-parts and shoots of three individual plants per treatment.   ****[PLEXdb( http://www.plexdb.org ) has submitted this series at GEO on behalf of the original contributor,  Sara Schaarschmidt.  The equivalent experiment is GM53 at PLEXdb.]

DESIGN
genotype: Bragg wt - inoculation: - - tissue type name: root-parts A & B(3-replications); genotype: Bragg wt - inoculation: - - tissue type name: shoot(3-replications); genotype: Bragg wt - inoculation: + - tissue type name: root-part A (myc)(3-replications); genotype: Bragg wt - inoculation: + - tissue type name: root-part B (non-myc)(3-replications); genotype: Bragg wt - inoculation: + - tissue type name: shoot(3-replications); genotype: nts1007 - inoculation: - - tissue type name: root-parts A & B(3-replications); genotype: nts1007 - inoculation: - - tissue type name: shoot(3-replications); genotype: nts1007 - inoculation: + - tissue type name: root-part A (myc)(3-replications); genotype: nts1007 - inoculation: + - tissue type name: root-part B (non-myc)(3-replications); genotype: nts1007 - inoculation: + - tissue type name: shoot(3-replications)

PLATFORM
GPL4592 [Soybean] Affymetrix Soybean Genome Array

CITATIONS
23777981

