TITLE
Subtracted Diversity Array identifies novel molecular markers including retrotransposons for fingerprinting Echinacea species

ORGANISM
Echinacea pallida ; Echinacea purpurea ; Echinacea tennesseensis ; Echinacea angustifolia ; Echinacea paradoxa x Echinacea pallida ; Echinacea angustifolia var. angustifolia ; Echinacea angustifolia var. strigosa ; Echinacea paradoxa var. neglecta ; Echinacea paradoxa var. paradoxa

SUMMARY
Echinacea, native to the Canadian prairies and the prairie states of the United States, has a long tradition as a folk medicine for the Native Americans. Currently, Echinacea are among the top 10 selling herbal medicines in the U.S. and Europe, due to increasing popularity for the treatment of common cold and ability to stimulate the immune system. However, the genetic relationships within the species of this genus are unclear, which makes difficult the authentication of the species used for the medicinal industry. We report the construction of a novel Subtracted Diversity Array (SDA) for Echinacea species and demonstrate the potential of this array for isolating highly polymorphic sequences.

DESIGN
In order to selectively isolate Echinacea-specific sequences, a Suppression Subtractive Hybridization (SSH) was performed between a pool of twenty-four Echinacea genotypes and a pool of other angiosperms and non-angiosperms. A total of 283 subtracted genomic DNA (gDNA) fragments were amplified and arrayed. Twenty-seven Echinacea genotypes, including four that were not used in the array construction, could be successfully discriminated. Interestingly, unknown samples of E. paradoxa and E. purpurea could be unambiguously identified from the cluster analysis. Furthermore, this Echinacea-specific SDA was also able to isolate highly polymorphic sequences. Five out of the eleven most discriminatory features matched to known retrotransposons.

PLATFORM
GPL16782 RMIT University Echinacea-specific array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

