TITLE
The ParS/ParR regulon in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1

ORGANISM
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1

SUMMARY
The ParS/ParR two component regulatory system plays important roles for multidrug resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In this study we report RNA-seq analyses of the transcriptomes of P. aeruginosa PAO1 wild type and par mutants growing in a minimal medium containing 2% casamino acids. This has allowed the quantification of PAO1 transcriptome, and further defines the regulon that is dependent on the ParS/ParR system for expression. Our RNA-seq analysis produced the first estimates of absolute transcript abundance for the 5570 coding genes in P. aeruginosa PAO1. Comparative transcriptomics of P. aeruginosa PAO1 and par mutants identified a total of 464 genes regulated by ParS and ParR. Results also showed that mutations in the parS/parR system abolished the expression of the mexEF-oprN operon by down-regulating the regulatory gene mexS. In addition to affecting drug resistance genes, transcripts of quorum sensing genes (rhlIR and pqsABCDE-phnAB), were significantly up-regulated in both parS and parR mutants. Consistent with these results, a significant portion of the ParS/ParR regulated genes belonged to the MexEF-OprN and quorum sensing regulons. Deletion of par genes also lead to overproduction of phenazines and increased swarming motility, consistent with the up-regulation of quorum sensing genes. Our results established a link among ParS/ParR, MexEF-OprN and quorum sensing in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Based on these results, we propose a model to illustrate the relationship among these regulatory systems in P. aeruginosa.

DESIGN
A total of 9 samples were analyzed in AB medium + 2% casamino acids, Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 wild type strain (3 replicates);  Pseudomonas aeruginosa parS mutant (3 replicates); Pseudomonas aeruginosa parR mutant (3 replicates).

PLATFORM
GPL16724 AB 5500xl Genetic Analyzer (Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

