TITLE
Maternal microRNAs secreted by the endometrium act as  transcriptomic regulators of the pre-implantation embryo (mouse)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The developmental origins of adult disease are now recognized to reflect intrauterine conditions during embryonic and fetal life. Cell-cell communication between the maternal endometrium and the pre-implantation embryo can occur by several means. Here, we show that maternal miRNAs are secreted by the endometrial epithelium to the endometrial fluid. Microarray assessments revealed the presence of specific miRNAs that are associated with the window of implantation and therefore in direct contact with the human preimplantation embryo. These miRNAS are transported as free or exosome-associated molecules secreted to the endometrial fluid and then uptake into the pre-implantation embryo through the trophoectoderm. Finally, these maternal miRNAs were able to induce transcriptional and functional modifications of the embryo. Therefore, we propose an innovative model whereby endometrial maternal miRNAS may function as transcriptomic regulators during early embryo development offering a new perspective on the developmental origins of adult diseases such as obesity, type 2 diabetes, and others that are now recognized to reflect intrauterine conditions.

DESIGN
The B6C3F1 mice strain was purchased. Female mice aged 6–8 weeks were primed to ovulate by administering 10 IU pregnant mare serum gonadotropin(Sigma-Aldrich, Irvine, UK), followed by administration of 10 IU hCG(Sigma-Aldrich, Irvine, UK),  48 hours later. Females were housed overnight with male breeders and examined the following morning for the presence of a vaginal plug (day 1 of pregnancy). On day 2 of pregnancy, mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation, and embryos flushed with PBS from the oviduct using a blunt 30-gauge needle. Then, embryos were cultured in CCM-30 medium (Vitrolife, Lubeck, Germany) in presence or absence of 400nM of mir-30d MIMIC or Scramble-Alexa 488 for 72 hours. Then embryos are four times washed in fresh CCM. Experiment were carried out by triplicate and with 30 embryos/condition

PLATFORM
GPL10333 Agilent-026655 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K v2 (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

