TITLE
Complex regulation of the PEP carboxykinase gene pck and characterization of its GntR-type regulator IolR as a repressor of myo-inositol utilization genes in Corynebacterium glutamicum

ORGANISM
Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC 13032

SUMMARY
DNA affinity chromatography with the promoter region of the Corynebacterium glutamicum pck gene, encoding phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCk), led to the isolation of four transcriptional regulators, i.e.,  RamA, GntR1, GntR2 and IolR. Determination of the PEPCk activity of the deletion mutants ΔramA, ΔgntR1ΔgntR2, and ΔiolR indicated that RamA represses pck during growth on glucose about twofold, whereas GntR1, GntR2, and IolR activate pck expression about twofold, irrespective whether glucose or acetate served as carbon source. The DNA binding sites of the four regulators in the pck promoter region were identified and their positions correlated with the predicted functions as repressor or activators. The iolR gene is located upstream and in divergent orientation to a iol gene cluster, encoding proteins involved in myo-inositol uptake and degradation. Comparative DNA microarray analysis of the ΔiolR mutant and the parental wild-type revealed strongly elevated ( > 100-fold)  mRNA levels of the iol genes in the mutant, indicating that the primary function of IolR is the repression of the iol genes. IolR binding sites were identified in the promoter regions of iolC, iolT and iolR itself, which presumably is subject to negative autoregulation. A consensus DNA-binding motif was identified (5’-KGWCHTRACA-3’) which corresponds well to those of other GntR-type regulators of the HutC family. Taken together, our results disclose a complex regulation of the pck gene in C. glutamicum and identify IolR as an efficient repressor of genes involved in myo-inositol catabolism of this organism.

DESIGN
To identify genes that are potentially regulated by IolR, the transcriptome profile of the iolR deletion strain was compared to that of the WT using DNA microarray analysis. The strains were grown in CGXII minimal medium with 4% (wt/vol) glucose as sole carbon source and RNA was isolated from cells harvested in the early exponential growth phase (OD600 of about 5). The transcriptome comparison was performed in triplicate starting from independent cultures. The second replicate included a dye-swap.

PLATFORM
GPL15451 FZ_IBT1_C. glutamicum_10K_ver2 array

CITATIONS
23873914

