TITLE
Perturbation of polyamine catabolism affects normal grape ripening of Trincadeira cultivar

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
Grapes (Vitis vinifera L.) are economically the most important fruit crop worldwide. However, the complexity of molecular and biochemical events that lead to ripening of nonclimacteric fruits is not fully understood. In particular the role of polyamines´ catabolism has been little explored.  Ripening of Trincadeira grapes submitted to mock and guazatine treatments, a potent inhibitor of polyamine oxidase activity, was studied taking into account the transcriptional and metabolic profilings complemented with biochemical data. The mRNA expression profiles of one time point (EL 38) corresponding to harvest stage was compared between mock and guazatine treatments using the Affymetrix GrapeGen® genome array containing 23096 probesets corresponding to 18711 unique sequences. A total of 2113 probesets (1877 unigenes) were significantly differentially expressed (1.5 fold) between these samples. These unigenes were assigned to the functional categories of “metabolism”, “regulation overview”, “signaling”, “cellular process”, “transport overview”, “response to stimulus, stress”, “diverse/miscellaneous functions”, “xenoprotein, transposable element”, “development” and “unknown”.  Quantitative RT-PCR validated microarrays results being carried out for seven selected genes and three developmental stages (EL 35, EL 36 and EL 38).   Functional enrichment analysis revealed that genes involved in amino acid, carbohydrate and water transport were more up-regulated in mock treated samples which may suggest that the strong dehydrated phenotype obtained in guazatine treated samples may be due to impaired transport mechanisms. In addition, genes involved in terpenes´ metabolism were differentially expressed between guazatine and mock treated samples. Altogether, the results support an important role of polyamine catabolism in normal grape ripening namely in aroma development and cell expansion.

DESIGN
1 time point in 2010 season at EL 38. 3 biological replicates. 2 treatments

PLATFORM
GPL11004 Affymetrix GrapeGen Vitis vinifera Microarray [CDF: GrapeGena520510F]

CITATIONS
24296250

