TITLE
Ethanol cellular defense induce unfolded protein response in yeast

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
Ethanol is a valuable industrial product and a common metabolite used by many cell types. However, this molecule produces high levels of cytotoxicity affecting cellular performance at several levels. In the presence of ethanol, cells must adjust some of their components, such as the membrane lipids to maintain homeostasis. In the case of microorganism as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, ethanol is one of the principal products of their metabolism and is the main stress factor during fermentation. Although many efforts have been made, mechanisms of ethanol tolerance are not fully understood and very little evidence is available to date for specific signaling by ethanol in the cell. This work studied two Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains, CECT10094 and Temohaya-26, isolated from flor wine and traditional fermentations respectively, which differ in ethanol tolerance, in order to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the ethanol stress response and the reasons for different ethanol tolerance. The transcriptome was analyzed after ethanol stress and, among others, an increased activation of genes related with the unfolded protein response (UPR) and its transcription factor, Hac1p, was observed in the tolerant strain CECT10094. We observed that this strain also resist more UPR agents than Temohaya-26 and the UPR-ethanol stress correlation was corroborated observing growth of 15 more strains and discarding UPR correlation with other stresses as thermal or oxidative stress. Furthermore, higher activation of UPR pathway in the tolerant strain CECT10094 was observed using a UPR mCherry reporter. Finally, we observed UPR activation in response to ethanol stress in other S. cerevisiae ethanol tolerant strains as the wine strains T73 and EC1118.

DESIGN
Two condition experiment and two strains. CECT10094 and Temohaya-26 strains were harvested at 1h and after exponential phase in presence of 0% and 10% (v/v)ethanol in media. All samples were labeled with Cy5 dye, while a reference pool prepared by pooling the RNA extracted in all samples was labeled with Cy3. Three biological replicates were combined and indirect comparison between slides belonging to stressed and unstressed samples to identify genes whose variation is due to the effect of ethanol was performed. Biological triplicates are included. One replicate per array.

PLATFORM
GPL16750 UHN Yeast 6.4Kv7

CITATIONS
26925053

