TITLE
Accelerated progression of chronic lymphocytic leukemia in Eμ-TCL1 mice expressing catalytically inactive RAG1

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is often preceded by a benign monoclonal or oligoclonal CD5+ B cell lymphocytosis.  We have generated transgenic mice expressing a catalytically inactive, dominant-negative recombination activating gene 1 (dnRAG1 mice) in the periphery.  These animals develop an early-onset indolent CD5+ B cell lymphocytosis, caused in part by a defect in secondary V(D)J rearrangements initiated to alter autoreactive B cell receptor specificity.  Hypothesizing that the CD5+ B cells accumulating in dnRAG1 mice represent a CLL precursor, we crossed dnRAG1 mice with CLL-prone Eµ-TCL1 mice to determine whether dnRAG1 expression in Eµ-TCL1 mice accelerates the onset of CLL-like disease.  We find that CD5+ B cell expansion and CLL progression occurs more rapidly and uniformly in double-transgenic mice (DTG mice) compared to Eµ-TCL1 mice, but with similar phenotypic and leukemogenic features. To gain insight into genes or pathways responsible for CD5+ B cell accumulation in the transgenic mice, we performed comparative gene expression profiling studies using normal and CD5+ B cells isolated from wild-type and transgenic mice at either 12 weeks of age (pre-leukemia) or at CLL onset in DTG mice (using age-matched wild-type and single-transgenic mice as controls). These analyses confirm the upregulation of tolerogenic genes in CD5+ B cells and reveal a possible role for prolactin signaling in the regulation of receptor editing.  This study suggests that a failure to remodel B cell antigen receptor genes in response to autoreactivity may promote the benign accumulation of CD5+ B cells, which may then be subjected to secondary genetic lesions that promote CLL progression.

DESIGN
dnRAG1 mice were bred to Eµ-TCL1 mice to obtain cohorts of wild-type (WT), single-transgenic (dnRAG1 and Eµ-TCL1), and DTG mice.  Splenic CD19+B220hiCD5- B cells from WT mice or CD19+CD5+ B cells from transgenic mice were purified using fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS).  Biotin end-labeled cDNA prepared from the sorted cells was hybridized to Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Arrays.  These experiments were performed two independent times: once with a cohort of 12-week-old mice, and once with older mice ( > 34 weeks old) consisting of two ill DTG mice and their age-matched counterparts. At least two biological replicates were used where possible.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
23502221

