TITLE
Regulatory role of glycerol in Candida albicans biofilm formation

ORGANISM
Candida albicans

SUMMARY
Biofilm formation on medically implanted devices by Candida albicans poses a significant clinical challenge. Here we compared biofilm-associated gene expression in two clinical C. albicans isolates, SC5314 and WO-1, to identify shared gene regulatory responses that may be functionally relevant. Among the 50 genes most highly expressed in biofilms relative to planktonic (suspension-grown) cells, we were able to recover insertion mutations in 25 genes. We observed that 20 of the 25 mutants have altered biofilm-related properties, including cell-substrate adherence, cell-cell signaling, and azole susceptibility. We focused on the most highly up-regulated gene in biofilms, RHR2, which specifies the glycerol biosynthetic enzyme glycerol-3-phosphate phosphatase. Glycerol is 5-fold more abundant in biofilm cells than planktonic cells, and an rhr2D/D strain accumulates 2-fold less biofilm glycerol than the wild type. Under in vitro growth conditions, the rhr2D/D mutant has reduced biofilm biomass and reduced adherence to silicone. The rhr2D/D mutant is severely defective in biofilm formation in vivo, in a rat catheter infection model. Expression profiling of the rhr2D/D mutant indicates that it has reduced expression of cell surface adhesin genes ALS1, ALS3, and HWP1, as well as a large fraction of all other biofilm up-regulated genes. Reduced adhesin expression is the cause of the rhr2D/D mutant biofilm defect, because overexpression of ALS1, ALS3, or HWP1 restores biofilm formation ability to the mutant in vitro and in vivo. Our findings indicate that internal glycerol has a regulatory role in biofilm gene expression, and that adhesin genes are among the main functional Rhr2-regulated genes.

DESIGN
Gene expression profiles, in duplicate; (1) for biofilm vs. planktonic growth conditions for the two wild-type clinical isolates of Candida albicans (SC5314 and WO1-white/WO1-opaque), and (2) for rhr2Δ/Δ mutant and complemented strain, via RNA-deep sequencing using Illumina GA2 and HiSeq2000 platforms, respectively

