TITLE
Natural anitsense transcripts in Plasmodium vivax clinical isolates

ORGANISM
Plasmodium vivax

SUMMARY
Plasmodium vivax is the most geographically widespread human malaria parasite causing approximately 130-435 million infections annually. It is an economic burden in many parts of the world and poses a public health challenge along with the other Plasmodium sp. The biology of this parasite is very little understood.  Emerging evidences of severe complications due to infections by this parasite provides an impetus to focus research on the same. Investigating this parasite directly from the infected patients is the most feasible way to study its biology and any pathogenic mechanisms which may exist. Gene expression studies of this parasite directly obtained from the patients has provided evidence of gene regulation resulting in varying amount of transcript levels in the different blood stages. However, the mechanisms regulating gene expression in malaria parasites are not well understood. Discovery of natural antisense transcripts (NATs) in P. falciparum has suggested that these might play an important role in regulating gene expression. We report here the genome-wide occurrence of NATs in P. vivax parasites from patients with differing clinical symptoms. A total of 1348 NATs against annotated gene loci have been detected using a custom designed strand specific microarray. Majority of NATs identified from this study shows positive correlation with the expression pattern of the sense transcript. Our data also shows condition specific expression patterns of varying S and AS transcript levels. Genes with AS transcripts enrich to various biological processes. This is the first report detailing the presence of NATs from clinical isolates of P. vivax. The data suggests differential regulation of gene expression in diverse clinical conditions and would lead to future detailed investigations of genome regulation.

DESIGN
Plasmodium vivax isolates  were collected from patients (n = 8) with differing clinical conditions.The patients exhibited symptoms categorized as un-complicated (n =1) or complicated malaria (n = 7). Criteria for determination of complicated disease were based on World Health Organization year 2010 guidelines. Microarray array based transcriptional profiling was carried out to detect prevalence of natural antisense transcripts.

PLATFORM
GPL16492 Plasmodium Vivax Custom 244k Array designed by Genotypic Technology Pvt. Ltd. & Prof.Ashis K Das (AMADID:019103)

CITATIONS
24121022 , 26484095

