TITLE
Different responses of murine and human macrophages to leptospiral infection revealed by comparative array analysis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens ; Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Leptospirosis is a re-emerging tropical infectious disease caused by the pathogenic Leptospira spp. The different host innate immune responses were partially related to the different severity of leptospirosis. In this study, we employed transcriptomics and cytokine array to comparatively calculate the responses of murine peritoneal macrophages (MPM) and human peripheral blood monocytes (HBM) to leptospiral infection, and uncover a series of different expression regulations of these two immune cells. The regulation percentages in several biological processes of MPM, such as the antigen process and presentation, the regulation of membrane potential, and the innate immune response, etc., were much greater than those of HBM ( > 2 folds). In HBM and MPM, the CASP8 and FADD-like apoptosis regulator genes were significantly up-regulated, which supported previous results that the caspase-8/3 pathway plays an important role in macrophage apoptosis during leptospiral infection. The key component of complement pathway, C3, was only up-regulated in MPM. Several cytokines (e.g. IL-10, TNF-alpha) were differently expressed at both mRNA and protein level in MPM and HBM. The differences in the transcriptomics and the cytokine expression revealed in this study were partially consistent with the different outcomes of the chronic and acute leptospirosis; thus, these findings facilitated further molecular study on the innate immune response to leptospiral infection.

DESIGN
Murine peritoneal macrophages (MPM) and human peripheral blood monocytes (HBM) were infected by pathogenic Leptospira. The host cells were collected at 1h, 2h, and 4h after infection. The uninfected macrophage sample was designed as a negative control. Three biological replicates were designed for each sample type. There were totally 24 hybridizations (12 for MPM, and 12 for HBM) included in this submission.

PLATFORM
GPL6845 Phalanx Mouse OneArray GPL14185 Human Whole Genome OneArrayTM v4 DNA Microarray

CITATIONS
24130911

