TITLE
Evaluation of hepatic gene expression profiles during androgen exposure in female mosquitofish

ORGANISM
Gambusia holbrooki

SUMMARY
The Eastern Mosquitofish (Gambusia holbrooki) is a non-model species with the potential for development of biomarkers of endocrine disrutpting chemical (EDC) exposure due to its androgen-driven secondary sexual characteristics. While G. holbrooki have been utilized in the field as bioindicator organisms EDC exposure in areas impacted by pulp and paper mills, the lack of molecular tools and general understanding of how G. holbrooki are impacted by androgen exposure hinder the use of this organism as a widespread tool for the evaluation of these chemicals in the environment. While traditional gene-by-gene approaches have provided a list of genes that may be appropriate for developing into biomarkers of androgen exposure, a more inclusive method could provide more rapid and expansive determination of genes that can be developed into biomarkers of androgen exposure. The objective of this study is toutilize a mosquitofish microarray to determine potential biomarkers of chronic androgen exposure. The specific aim was to determine genes that may be developed into biomarkers of chronic androgen exposure in hepatic tissues using 17β-trenbolone (TB) exposed adult female G. holbrooki by microarray analysis.

DESIGN
Liver tissues from a 14-day exposure of female G. holbrooki to 1 µg/L of the potent androgen receptor agonist 17β-trenbolone (17β-hydroxyestra-4,9,11-trien-3-one; abbreviated as TB) [Brockmeier 2013] were used as the first sample for microarray analysis using the custom G. holbrooki microarray to determine genes that were significantly up or down-regulated during a chronic androgen agonist exposure. RNA was isolated from the livers as previously described using TRIzol (Invitrogen, Grand Island, USA), hydrated using RNAsecure (Ambion, Grand Island, USA), and DNase treated using the Turbo DNA-free kit (Ambion, Grand Island, USA). Four oocyte-development stage-matched RNA samples per treatment were evaluated for RNA integrity using the 2100 BioAnalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, USA). The range of RIN values was 8.3-8.9.

