TITLE
Yeast zeta-crystallin: An AU-Rich Element Binding Protein Involved in the Nutritional Stress Response

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
The yeast ζ-crystallin Zta1p interacts specifically with RNA sequences rich in adenine and uracil (AU-rich element). We have looked for possible targets of Zta1p through a comparative transcriptional analysis of the yeast defective in ZTA1 (Δzta1) versus the wild-type by microarray. This revealed that a group of genes implicated on amino acid biosynthesis are affected by the lack of ZTA1. The effect on one of the targets ARG4 was studied in more detail, revealing a clear positive correlation between ZTA1 and ARG4 expression at the mRNA level. We demonstrate that Zta1p is able to bind specifically to the 3’UTR AU-rich elements of ARG4 mRNA in vitro, suggesting that the mechanism by which ZTA1 modulates the expression of ARG4 is probably mediated by this mRNA binding ability. Moreover, the expression of ZTA1 is also under the control of the TOR pathway, and under Gcn4p, which regulates genes implicated in the response to nutrient availability and the general amino acid control (GAAC). In summary, our results shed light on the functional role of the ζ-crystallin family as stress response proteins, with a conserved functional role, from yeast to humans, in the post-transcriptional regulation of genes that need to be rapidly activated for cell defense.

DESIGN
Triplicate biological replicate experiments were performed, where the two strains, ∆zta1 and wild-type, were grown in the presence or absence of hydrogen peroxide. The experimental design was defined to directly compare the ∆zta1 versus the wild-type strain in either of the two hydrogen peroxide treatment conditions (i.e. treated ∆zta1 versus treated wt, or untreated ∆zta1 versus untreated wt). A duplicate hybridization on a separate array with dye swapping was performed in each case to correct for dye bias effects. Thus, a total of 12 array data sets were produced as a result of processing three experimental pairs of samples, for each of two treatment conditions, with dye swap duplicates.

PLATFORM
GPL9294 Agilent-015072 Yeast Oligo Microarray 4x44K G2519F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
25715111

