TITLE
Transposon defense by endo-siRNAs, piRNAs and somatic pilRNAs: Roles of Loqs-PD and R2D2

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Transposable elements are a serious threat for genome integrity and their control via small RNA mediated silencing pathways is an ancient strategy. The fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster has two silencing mechanisms that repress TEs expression: endogenous siRNAs (esiRNAs or endo-siRNAs) and Piwi-interacting small RNAs (piRNAs). The biogenesis of endo-siRNAs involves Loqs-PD, which acts predominantly during processing of dsRNA by Dcr-2, and R2D2 that primarily helps to direct siRNAs for loading into Ago2. We provide deep sequencing evidence consistent with the idea that R2D2 and Loqs-PD can function in part redundantly. Certain transposons display a preference for either dsRBD-protein for production or loading; this appeared to correlate neither with overall abundance, classification of the transposon or a specific site of genomic origin. The endo-siRNA biogenesis pathway in the germline operates according to the same principles as the existing model for the soma, and its impairment does not significantly affect piRNAs. Expanding the analysis, we confirmed the occurrence of somatic piRNA-like RNAs (pilRNAs) that show a ping-pong signature. We detected expression of the Piwi-family protein mRNAs only barely above background, indicating that the somatic pilRNAs may arise from a small sub-population of somatic cells that express a functional piRNA pathway.

DESIGN
small RNA sampling experiment; small RNAs were prepared from head & thorax as well as dissected ovaries of Adult female Drosophila melanogaster. We used homozygous mutants of the dsRBD proteins Loqs and r2d2 to determine their contribution to the biogenesis of transposon-derived small RNAs. Heterozygous mutant animals served as control. For each RNA sample, we performed one deep-sequencing run without any treatment, and in parallel one sequencing run after periodate oxidation and beta-elimination. After this treatment, only Ago2, Piwi, Aub and Ago3-loaded small RNAs remain as they carry a 2'-O-methyl modification at their 3'-end. This helps to determine the loading status of the small RNAs detected. In total 8 different RNA samples were prepared and 16 libraries were sequenced.

PLATFORM
GPL11203 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Drosophila melanogaster)

CITATIONS
24454776

