TITLE
Endothelial cells require miR-214 to secrete exosomes that suppress senescence and induce angiogenesis in human and mouse endothelial cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Signalling between endothelial cells, endothelial progenitor cells and stromal cells is crucial for the establishment and maintenance of vascular integrity and involves exosomes, among other signalling pathways. Exosomes are important mediators of intercellular communication in immune signalling, tumour survival, stress responses and angiogenesis. The ability of exosomes to incorporate and transfer mRNAs encoding for ‘acquired’ proteins or miRNAs repressing ‘resident’ mRNA translation suggests that they can influence the physiological behaviour of recipient cells. We here demonstrate that miR-214, a miRNA that controls endothelial cell function and angiogenesis, plays a dominant role in exosome-mediated signalling between endothelial cells. Endothelial cell-derived exosomes stimulated migration and angiogenesis in recipient cells, whereas exosomes from miR-214 depleted endothelial cells failed to stimulate these processes. Exosomes containing miR-214 repressed the expression of Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated in recipient cells, thereby preventing senescence and allowing blood vessel formation. Concordantly, specific reduction of miR-214 content in exosome-producing endothelial cells abolishes the angiogenesis the angiogenesis stimulatory function of the resulting exosomes. Collectively our data indicate that endothelial cells release miR-214 containing exosomes to stimulate angiogenesis through silencing of Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated in neighbouring target cells.

DESIGN
Gene expression analysis of HMEC endothelial cells exposed to supernatant containing either HMEC derived exosomes (miR-214 high), HMEC derived exosomes depleted of miR-214 (miR-214 low) or containing no exosomes (no exosomes). Each sample was analysed in duplo.

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

