TITLE
Super Vs Non

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
The main objective of superovulatory treatment is to achieve multiple ovulations and produce multiple embryos. The technique is intended to rescue a cohort of follicles within a follicular wave that would otherwise regress. Superstimulory treatments change the intra-follicular and systemic hormonal milieu, but it is not clear how and to what extent treatment alters gene expression of follicular cells. In this study, a genome-wide bovine oligo-microarray was used to compare the gene expression of granulosa cells from post-LH preovulatory dominant follicle with those from follicles of the same status after superstimulatory treatment. Cows were allocated randomly to two groups (superstimulation group and control group, n=6 cows per group). A new follicular wave was induced by transvaginal ultrasound-guided ablation of follicles ≥5 mm in diameter, and a progesterone-releasing device (CIDR) was placed in vagina. The superstimulation group was given eight doses of 25 mg FSH im at 12-h intervals starting from the day of wave emergence (Day 0), whereas the control group was not given any FSH treatment. Both groups were given prostaglandin F2α im twice, 12 h apart, on Day 3 and the CIDR was removed at the second injection; 25 mg pLH was given im 24 h after CIDR removal, and cows were ovariectomized 24 h later. Granulosa cells were collected for RNA extraction, amplification and microarray hybridization. To translate microarray results to a physiological context, a list of differentially expressed transcripts were biologically annotated. A total of 190 genes were down-regulated and 280 genes were up-regulated in superstimulated group when compared with the reference (non-superstimulated control) group.

DESIGN
straight comparison of superstimulation group (the treatment; group 1) versus non-superstimulated ( the reference; group 4)  using 3 different aninals (biological replicates) in each group and performed dye swap. For example on array 1:  group1 cow 1 versus group 4 cow 1 (cy3 vs cy5) and on array 4 is the dey swap group 4 cow 1 versus group 1 cow 1 (cy3 vs cy5).

PLATFORM
GPL13226 Agilent-028298 Embryogene Bovine 45K microarray

CITATIONS
23740080

