TITLE
Induced erythropoiesis during acute anemia in Atlantic salmon

ORGANISM
Salmo salar

SUMMARY
Study was performed to improve understanding of erythropoiesis (EP) induced by acute anemia in Atlantic salmon. Fish was injected with a low dose of hemolytic compound phenylhydrazine (PHZ). Treatment resulted in moderate but significant reduction of hematocrit (Hct) and increased transcription of cardiac erythropoietin (epo) at 2 days post challenge (dpc), and epo receptor (epor) in spleen from 2 to 4 dpc. Oligonucleotide microarrays were used to characterize the events of EP in the spleen.  These results were compared to gene expression profiles of untreated mature red blood cells (RBC) in order to search for erythroid-specific genes. Splenic responses suggested a prevalence of protective mechanisms at the first stage, characterized by induced xenobiotic metabolism and responses to oxidative and protein stress. Erythroid-specific regulation was evident at 2 dpc and enhanced by 4 dpc, and gene expression profiles witnessed a rapid establishment of RBC phenotype although Hct levels remained low. A large group of genes showed a strong correlation to globins by expression profiles. In addition to epor this included genes of heme and iron metabolism, scavengers of free radicals and chaperones, channels and transporters, markers of erythrocytes, regulators of proliferation and cell cycle arrest and many genes with unidentified roles in RBC differentiation. Induced EP in spleen was characterized by specific features, such as upregulation of virus-responsive genes and sustained high expression of proapoptotic genes including caspases. Transcriptome changes suggested an association between EP and suppression of several developmental programs including adaptive immune responses. In conclusion, acute hemolysis and resulting anemia rapidly induced EP in the spleen of Atlantic salmon, which showed both common characteristics for all vertebrates as well as fish-specific properties.

DESIGN
Atlantic salmon was injected with a single dose of PHZ (6 mg/kg body mass) or saline. Spleen samples for microarray analyses were collected after 2 and 4 days. Additonally, red blood cells (RBC) were compared with spleen

PLATFORM
GPL16555 Agilent-030860 Salmon Immunity and Quality 15k custom array_SIQ6

CITATIONS
23665104

