TITLE
Expression data from the starved first larval stage (L1) C. elegans animals that were incubated in S-basal buffer for 30 hours after bleaching

ORGANISM
Caenorhabditis elegans

SUMMARY
How animals coordinate gene expression in response to starvation is an outstanding problem closely linked to aging, obesity, and cancer. Newly hatched Caenorhabditis elegans respond to food deprivation by halting development and promoting long-term survival (L1 diapause), thereby providing an excellent model to study starvation response. Through a genetic search, we have discovered that the tumor suppressor Rb critically promotes survival during L1 diapause and likely does so by regulating the expression of genes in both insulin-IGF-1 signaling (IIS)-dependent and -independent pathways mainly in neurons and the intestine. Global gene expression analyses suggested that Rb maintains the “starvation-induced transcriptome” and represses the “re-feeding induced transcriptome”, including the repression of many pathogen/toxin/oxidative stress-inducible and metabolic genes, as well as the activation of many other stress-resistant genes, mitochondrial respiratory chain genes, and potential IIS receptor antagonists. Notably, the majority of genes dysregulated in starved L1 Rb(-) animals were not found to be dysregulated in fed conditions. Together, these findings identify Rb as a critical regulator of the starvation response and suggest a link between functions of tumor suppressors and starvation survival. These results may provide mechanistic insights into why cancer cells are often hypersensitive to starvation treatment.

DESIGN
Gravid C. elegans adult animals were bleached with hypochlorite and sodium hydroxide. The resulting eggs were hatched in 8–10 mL S-basal without cholesterol in 15-mL conical tubes, which were placed on an end-over-end rocker (VWR) at 20 °C. 30 hours later, starved L1s were collected for RNA preparations. Wild type and lin-35/Rb mutant were profiled in triplicate. All replicates were biological replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL200 [Celegans] Affymetrix C. elegans Genome Array

CITATIONS
23664972

