TITLE
Endothelial cell culture with Chapel Hill Ultrafine particle

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Epidemiology studies have linked exposure to pollutant particles to increased cardiovascular mortality and morbidity, however, the mechanism remains unknown.  In this study, we hypothesized that the ultrafine fraction of ambient pollutant particles would cause endothelial cells dysfunction. We profiled gene expression of human pulmonary artery endothelial cells (HPAEC) exposed to ultrafine Chapel Hill particles (UFP) (100μg/ml) or vehicle for 4h with Affymetrix HG U133 Plus 2.0 chips (N = 4 each).  Using an unpaired t-test (p < 0.01, 5% false discovery rate) we found 426 unique genes to be differentially expressed with 320 upregulated genes and 106 downregulated genes.  Among these genes, we noted upregulation of genes related to coagulation-inflammation circuitry including tissue factor (F3), coagulation factor II receptor-like 2 (F2RL2, PAR3), interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-8. Upregulation of these genes were independently confirmed by RT-PCR and/or protein release. Genes related to the CXC chemokine family that have been implicated in the pathogenesis of vascular disease were upregulated, including MCP-1 (2.60 fold), IL-8 (2.47 fold), CXCL1 (1.41 fold), CXCL2 (1.95 fold), CXCL3 (2.28 fold) and CXCR4 (1.30 fold). In addition, genes related to clotting independent signaling of F3 were also differentially expressed, including FOS, JUN and NFKBIA.  Treatment of HPAEC with UFP for 16 hours increased the release of IL6 and IL8 by 1.9-fold and 1.8-fold respectively.  Pretreatment of HPAEC with a blocking antibody against F3 attenuated IL6 and IL8 release by 30% and 70% respectively.  Thus using gene profiling, we uncovered that UFP may induce vascular endothelial cells to express genes related to clotting and angiogenesis. These results provide a novel hypothesis that PM may cause cardiovascular adverse health effects via induction of tissue factor in vascular endothelial cells which then triggers clotting dependent and independent downstream signaling. Keywords: particle treatment

