TITLE
RNA-Seq analysis and targeted mutagenesis for improved free fatty acid production in an engineered cyanobacterium

ORGANISM
Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942

SUMMARY
Background: High-energy-density biofuels are typically derived from the fatty acid biosynthesis pathway, thus establishing free fatty acids (FFAs) as important fuel precursors. FFA production using photosynthetic microorganisms like cyanobacteria allows for direct conversion of carbon dioxide into fuel precursors. Recent studies investigating cyanobacterial FFA production have demonstrated the potential of this process, yet FFA production was also shown to have negative physiological effects on the cyanobacterial host, ultimately limiting high yields of FFAs. Results: Cyanobacterial FFA production was shown to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) and lead to increased cell membrane permeability. To identify genetic targets that may mitigate these toxic effects, RNA-seq analysis was used to investigate the host response of Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942. Stress response, nitrogen metabolism, photosynthesis, and protein folding genes were up-regulated during FFA production while genes involved in carbon and hydrogen metabolisms were down-regulated. Select genes were targeted for mutagenesis to confirm their role in mitigating FFA toxicity. Gene knockout of two porins and the overexpression of ROS-degrading proteins and hypothetical proteins reduced the toxic effects of FFA production, allowing for improved growth, physiology, and FFA production. Comparative transcriptomics, analyzing gene expression changes associated with FFA production and other stress conditions, identified additional key genes involved in cyanobacterial stress response. Conclusions: A total of 15 gene targets were identified to reduce the toxic effects of FFA production. While single-gene targeted mutagenesis led to minor increases in FFA production, the combination of these targeted mutations may yield additional improvement, advancing the development of high-energy-density fuels derived from cyanobacteria.

DESIGN
Three strains (7942, SE01, and SE02) were analyzed at two time points (100 h and 240 h) with 3 biological replicates each (with the exception of SE02, 100 h having only 2 replicates due to RNA loss during sample preparation.)

PLATFORM
GPL16957 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942)

CITATIONS
23919451

