TITLE
B27 modulation of LPS response

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Objectives How HLA-B27 contributes towards arthritis susceptibility is still unclear, but effects on the response to bacteria unrelated to the classical antigen presenting role of B27 have been suggested. This study investigated whether HLA-B27 modulates the innate response to LPS, a component shared between all Gram –ve bacteria that can trigger reactive arthritis. Methods Pools of U937 transfectants expressing either HLA-B27, HLA-A2, or the expression  plasmid alone were differentiated with PMA and stimulated with LPS.  Supernatants were analysed for TNF-alpha secretion and the gene expression profiles of unstimulated and LPS stimulated cells were determined by microarray analysis. Changes in gene expression that are indicative of an unfolded protein response were also analysed by quantitative PCR. Results TNF-alpha secretion, a biological marker of the inflammatory response to LPS, was not significantly different between U937-B27 and U937-control. No differences in gene expression between unstimulated U937- B27 and U937-control lines were detected.  Both U937-control and U937-B27 exhibited a stereotypic response to LPS. Only 1 gene, OAS2, was differentially expressed by these cell lines, and this was confirmed by quantitative PCR.  Analysis of  XBP-1 splicing suggested that a small increase in the unfolded protein response is induced following LPS stimulation, but this increase was seen in all transfectants. Conclusions The expression of B27 does not profoundly alter gene expression following LPS stimulation. Therefore, additional signals, such as those provided by cytokines or intracellular infection, may be required to reveal any influence of B27 expression on the inflammatory response. Keywords: antigen response

DESIGN
Pools of U937 transfectants expressing either HLA-B27, HLA-A2, or the expression  plasmid alone were differentiated with PMA and stimulated with LPS.  Supernatants were analysed for TNF-alpha secretion and the gene expression profiles of unstimulated and LPS stimulated cells were determined by microarray analysis. Changes in gene expression that are indicative of an unfolded protein response were also analysed by quantitative PCR.

PLATFORM
GPL3348 SRC Human Compugen 19K

CITATIONS
16877465

