TITLE
Genome-wide probing of RNA structure reveals active unfolding of mRNA structures in vivo

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae ; Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
We present an approach for globally monitoring RNA structure in native conditions in vivo with single nucleotide precision. This method is based on in vivo modification with dimethyl sulfate (DMS), which reacts with unpaired adenine and cytosine residues9, followed by deep sequencing to monitor modifications. Our data from yeast and mammalian cells are in excellent agreement with known mRNA structures and with the high-resolution crystal structure of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae ribosome10. Comparison between in vivo and in vitro data reveals that in rapidly dividing cells there are vastly fewer structured mRNA regions in vivo than in vitro. Even thermostable RNA structures are often denatured in cells, highlighting the importance of cellular processes in regulating RNA structure. Indeed, analysis of mRNA structure under ATP-depleted conditions in yeast reveals that energy-dependent processes strongly contribute to the predominantly unfolded state of mRNAs inside cells. Our studies broadly enable the functional analysis of physiological RNA structures and reveal that, in contrast to the Anfinsen view of protein folding, thermodynamics play an incomplete role in determining mRNA structure in vivo. We use Dimethyl Sulfate to probe the structure of rRNA and mRNA in yeast in vivo, in vitro, and at different temperatures in vitro. We obtain a great agreement between in vivo data and known mRNA structures as well as the ribosome crystal structure. We find that in contrast  to ribosomal rna, mRNAs are less structured in vivo than in vitro, and the structures present in vivo can only partially be explained by thermodynamic stability. In addition, we identify new regulatory structures present in vivo.

DESIGN
Examination of RNA structure in yeast under different conditions - in vivo and in vitro at five different temperatures (30,45,60,75,95) We adapt our DMS-seq assay for use in mammalian cells and probe RNA structure genome-wide in K562 cells. We probe the RNA structure of primary fibroblast using DMS on a genome-wide scale to confirm the presence of more structures in vitro. In addition we probe the RNA structure in yeast upon ATP depleted conditions to investigate whether active (ATP-dependent) processed are modulating RNA structure in vivo.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens) GPL13821 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)

CITATIONS
24336214

