TITLE
Mouse strain-specific responses to commensal gut bacteria at the mucosal gene expression level

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The host genotype has been proposed to contribute to individually composed bacterial communities in the gut. To provide deeper insight into interactions between gut bacteria and their host, we associated germ-free C3H and C57BL/10 mice with intestinal bacteria from a C57BL/10 donor mouse. Analysis of microbiota similarity between the experimental animals with denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) 13 weeks after association revealed the development of a mouse strain specific microbiota. Gene expression in the colonic mucosa was analyzed with a microarray approach taking advantage of a modified Affymetrix mouse genome chip. We detected 202 genes whose expression differed significantly by a factor of < 2. Application of bioinformatics tools demonstrated that functional terms including signaling/secretion, lipid degradation/catabolism, guanine nucleotide/guanylate binding and immune response were significantly enriched in differentially expressed genes. We had a closer look at the 56 genes with expression differences of < 4 and observed a higher expression in C57BL/10 mice of the genes coding for toll-like receptor 1 (4-fold) and angiogenin 4 (33-fold) which are involved in the recognition and response to gut bacteria. In contrast, a 70-fold higher expression of the phospholipase A2, group IIA-encoding gene (Pla2g2a) was detected in C3H mice. In addition, a number of interferon-inducible genes were higher expressed in C3H than in C57BL/10 mice including Gbp1 (18-fold), Mal (7-fold), Oasl2 (7-fold), Ifi202b (7-fold), Rtp4 (6-fold), Ly6g6c (5-fold), Ifi27l2a (5-fold), Usp18 (5-fold), Ifit1 (5-fold), Ifi44 (4-fold), and Ly6g (4-fold) indicating that these cytokines play an essential role in microbiota regulation. However, genes coding for interferons, their receptors or factors involved in interferon signaling pathways were not differentially expressed between the two mouse strains. Taken together, our study confirms that the host genotype is involved in the establishment of host-specific bacterial communities in the gut. Based on expression differences after colonization with the same bacterial inoculum, we propose that Pla2g2a and interferon-dependent genes may contribute to this phenomenon.

DESIGN
Total RNA was extracted from the colonic mucosa  and hybridization was performed using 12.5 – 20 µg of cDNA on a customized Affymetrix nugomm 1a520177 chip.

