TITLE
Affymetrix expression data from GTEx

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project is a collaborative effort that aims to identify correlations between genotype and tissue-specific gene expression levels that will help identify regions of the genome that influence whether and how much a gene is expressed. GTEx is funded through the Common Fund, and managed by the NIH Office of the Director in partnership with the National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institute of Mental Health, the National Cancer Institute, the National Center for Biotechnology Information at the National Library of Medicine, the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, the National Institute on Drug Abuse, and the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke, all part of NIH. This series of 837 samples represents multiple tissues collected from 102 GTEX donors and 1 control cell line. In total, 30 tissue sites are represented including Adipose, Artery, Heart, Lung, Whole Blood, Muscle, Skin, and 11 brain subregions. RNA-seq expression data, robust clinical data, pathological annotations, and genotypes are also available for these samples from dbGaP ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=phs000424.v2.p1 ) and the GTEx portal (www.broadinstitute.org/gtex). While GTEx is no longer generating Affymetrix expression data, donor enrollment continues and is expected to reach 1,000 by the end of 2015. Updates to the GTEx data in dbGaP and the GTEx Portal will be made periodically. contributor: GTEx Laboratory, Data Analysis, and Coordinating Center (LDACC) contributor: The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard (LDACC PIs: Kristin Ardlie and Gaddy Getz)

DESIGN
GTEx samples are collected from deceased donors at low post-mortem intervals and preserved in PAXgene fixative prior to DNA and RNA extraction.

PLATFORM
GPL16977 [HuGene-1_1-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.1 ST Array [HuGene11stv1_Hs_ENSG version 14.1.0]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

