TITLE
Resveratrol prevents diet-induced arterial degeneration and stiffening in nonhuman primates

ORGANISM
Macaca mulatta

SUMMARY
Cardiovascular (CV) disease is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in Western societies. Even after accounting for traditional CV risk factors (e.g. obesity, smoking and hypertension), the inflammation-driven thickening and stiffening of central arteries is a strong predictor of adverse outcomes. Arterial wall changes are universally associated with advancing age and show unparalleled worsening in metabolic syndrome. In mice, resveratrol ameliorates a high-fat diet induced arterial wall inflammation and slows age-associated physiologic deteriorations within the arterial wall. Here we tested resveratrol in adult male rhesus monkeys, an experimental model relevant to humans. A diet rich in fat and sucrose (HFS) led to an increase in body weight as well as thickening and stiffening of the aortic wall, marked by diffuse inflammation, fibrosis and fat infiltration. Dietary resveratrol supplementation prevented diet-induced structural and functional alterations within the aortic wall, and abrogated the deleterious vascular endothelial and smooth muscle responses. Integrative genomic and proteomic analyses of aortic tissues revealed molecular signatures consistent with improved vascular functions. Thus, resveratrol conferred protection against the initiation of diet-induced inflammatory events that progress to pathological thickening and stiffening of large arteries. Dietary resveratrol may therefore hold promise as a novel therapy to ameliorate metabolic stress-induced CV disease.

DESIGN
After baseline assessment, four male rhesus monkeys remained on the healthy standard diet  (SD), 10 male rhesus monkeys were begun on a high fat/high sucrose (HFS) diet and 10 male rhesus monkeys were begun on a high fat/high sucrose (HFS) diet plus Resveratrol, 80mg/day.  After one year of dietary intervention, the amount of resveratrol was increased to 240mg/day for one additional year.  Tissues were then harvested for the array experiments.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
24882067

