TITLE
Transcription factor TFAP2C regulates major programs required for murine fetal germ cell maintenance and haploinsufficiency predisposes to teratomas in male mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Maintenance and maturation of primordial germ cells is controlled by complex genetic and epigenetic cascades, and disturbances in this network lead to either infertility or malignant aberration. Transcription factor Tcfap2c / TFAP2C has been described to be essential for primordial germ cell maintenance and to be upregulated in several human germ cell cancers. Using global gene expression profiling, we identified genes deregulated upon loss of Tcfap2c in primordial germ cell-like cells. We show that loss of Tcfap2c affects many aspects of the genetic network regulating germ cell biology, such as downregulation maturation markers and induction of markers indicative of somatic differentiation, cell cycle, epigenetic remodeling, and pluripotency associated genes. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation analyses demonstrated binding of Tcfap2c to regulatory regions of deregulated genes (Sfrp1, Dmrt1, Nanos3, c-Kit, Cdk6, Cdkn1a, Fgf4, Klf4, Dnmt3b and Dnmt3l) suggesting that these genes are direct transcriptional targets of Tcfap2c in primordial germ cells. Since Tcfap2c deficient primordial germ cell like cells display cancer related deregulations in epigenetic remodeling, cell cycle and pluripotency control, the Tcfap2c-knockout allele was bred onto 129S2/Sv genetic background. There, mice heterozygous for Tcfap2c develop germ cell cancer with high incidence. Precursor lesions can be observed as early as E16.5 in developing testes displaying persisting expression of pluripotency markers. We further demonstrate, that mice with a heterozygous deletion of the Tcfap2c target gene Nanos3 are also prone to develop teratoma. These data highlight Tcfap2c as a critical and dose-sensitive regulator of germ cell fate.

DESIGN
8 samples were analyzed. Ctrl ESC:     Control mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs), 2 biological rep KO ESC:       Tcfap2c knock-out mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs), 2 biological rep Ctrl PGC:     Control mouse primordial germ cells (PGCs), 2 biological rep KO PGC:       Tcfap2c knock-out  mouse primordial germ cells (PGCs), 2 biological rep

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
23967156

