TITLE
An integrative analysis of renal miRNA- and mRNA-expression signatures in progressive chronic kidney disease [discovery cohort]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) significantly contribute to chronic kidney disease (CKD) progression via regulating mRNA expression and abundance. However, their association with clinical outcome remains poorly understood. We performed large scale miRNA and mRNA expression profiling on cryo-cut renal biopsy sections from n=43 subjects. miRNAs differentiating stable and progressive cases were determined, and putative target mRNAs showing inversely correlated expression profiles were identified and further characterized. We found a downregulation of 7 miRNAs in the progressive phenotype, and an upregulation of 29 target mRNAs which are involved in inflammatory response, cell-cell-interaction, apoptosis, and intracellular signaling. Particularly a diminished expression of miR-206 in progressive disease correlated significantly with the upregulation of the target mRNAs CCL19, CXCL1, IFNAR2, NCK2, PTK2B, PTPRC, RASGRP1, and TNFRSF25, all participating in inflammatory pathways. Progressive cases also showed a decreased expression of miR-532-3p, and an increased expression of target transcripts MAP3K14, TNFRSF10B/TRAIL-R2, TRADD, and TRAF2, all being involved in apoptosis pathways. miR-206, miR-532-3p and all 12 mRNA targets correlated with the degree of histological damage. The identified renal miRNA- and mRNA-profiles, and biological pathways may represent regulatory mechanisms, which are commonly present in various kinds of progressive chronic kidney disease.

DESIGN
mRNA- and miRNA-profiling was performed on renal biopsy samples from human subjects with various proteinuric nephropathies, miRNA-mRNA correlations were identified for those subjects who showed a progressive decline of renal function during follow up.

PLATFORM
GPL13497 Agilent-026652 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K v2 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
26707063

