TITLE
Genetic stabilization in Saccharomyces intra- and interspecific hybrids obtained by different hybridization methodologies

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
In this work, we evaluated the genetic stabilization process, of the intra- (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and interspecific (S. cerevisiae x Saccharomyces kudriavzevii) hybrids obtained by different non-GMO techniques, under fermentative conditions. Large-scale transitions in genome size, detected by measuring total DNA content, and genome reorganizations in both nuclear and mitochondrial DNA, evidenced by changes in molecular markers, were observed during the experiments. Interspecific hybrids seem to need fewer generations to reach genetic stability than intraspecific hybrids. The largest number of molecular patterns among the derived stable colonies was observed for intraspecific hybrids, particularly for those obtained by rare-mating in which the total amount of initial DNA was larger. Finally, a representative intraspecific stable hybrid underwent a normal industrial process to obtain active dry yeast production as an important point at which inducing changes in genome composition was possible. No changes in hybrid genetic composition after this procedure were confirmed by comparative genome hybridization. According to our results, fermentation steps 2 and 5 –comprising between 30 and 50 generations- suffice to obtain genetically stable interspecific and intraspecific hybrids, respectively. This work aimed to develop and validate a fast genetic stabilization method for newly generated Saccharomyces hybrids under selective enological conditions. A comparison of the whole stabilization process in intra- and interspecific hybrids showing different ploidy levels, as a result of using different hybridization methodologies, was also made.

DESIGN
A stable hybrid strain was compared with itself before and after ADY (active dry yeast) production in order to evaluate the genetic stability of this strain.

PLATFORM
GPL13945 UHNMAC Yeast 6.4 K array (Y6.4K) version 7

CITATIONS
Laura Pérez-Través, Christian A. Lopes, Eladio Barrio, Amparo Querol. Stabilization process in Saccharomyces intra- and interspecific hybrids in fermentative conditions. Int Microbiol (2014) 17:213-224 http://dx.doi.org/10.2436/20.1501.01.224

