TITLE
A spatiotemporal understanding of growth regulation during the salt-stress response (Agilent)

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
A genome-scale test of dynamic gene expression changes and homeostasis in salt stress response was genereated using whole roots sample of wild type columbia. Seedlings of columbia were grown under standard conditions for 5 days, and then they were transfered to media supplemented with 140mM NaCl for a series of time: 1 hour, 3 hours, 20 hours, 2 days, 4 days and and 8 days, as well as to standard condition for the same series of time. 2 replicates for each condition was used. Plant environmental responses involve dynamic changes in growth and signaling, yet little is understood as to how progress through these temporal events is controlled.  In this study we explore the phenotypic and transcriptional events involved in the acclimation of the Arabidopsis seedling root to a rapid change in salinity.  Using live-imaging analysis, we show that growth is dynamically regulated with a period of growth quiescence followed by growth recovery and homeostasis.  Through the development and analysis of a new high-resolution spatiotemporal transcriptional map, we have identified the key hormone signaling pathways that regulate specific transcriptional programs, predict their spatial domain of action and link the activity of these pathways to the control of specific phases of growth control. Through the use of tissue-specific approaches to suppress the ABA pathway, we demonstrate that ABA signaling likely acts in select tissue layers to control spatially localized transcriptional programs and promote growth recovery.  In addition to the biological pathways directly affecting growth, we show that salt also controls many tissue-specific and time-point specific transcriptional responses that are expected to modify water transport, Casparian strip formation and protein translation.  Together, our data reveal a sophisticated assortment of regulatory programs acting together to coordinate spatially patterned biological changes involved in the immediate and long-term response to a stressful shift in environment.

DESIGN
To test a genome-scale dynamic changes and gene expression homeostasis of gene expression in Arabisopsis root in salt stress response, we generated this data using whole roots. Wild type plants of columbia were grown under standard conditions for 5 days, and then they were transfered to media supplemented with 140mM NaCl for a series of time: 1 hour, 3 hours, 20 hours, 2 days, 4 days and and 8 days, as well as to standard condition for the same series of time. 2 replicates for each condition was used.

