TITLE
Small nucleolar RNAs as new biomarkers in chronic lymphocytic leukemia

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) and small Cajal body-specific RNAs are non-coding RNAs involved in the maturation of other RNA molecules. Alterations of sno/scaRNA expression may play a role in cancerogenesis. This study elucidates the patterns of sno/scaRNA expression in highly purified cells from 211 chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) patients (Binet stage A) also in comparison with those of different normal B-cell subsets. CLLs display a sno/scaRNAs expression profile similar to normal memory, naïve and marginal-zone B-cells, with the exception of a few down-regulated transcripts (SNORA31, -6, -62, and -71C). Our analyses also suggest some heterogeneity in the pattern of sno/scaRNAs expression which is apparently unrelated to the major biological (ZAP-70 and CD38), molecular (IGHV mutation) and cytogenetic markers. Moreover, we found that SNORA70F was significantly down-regulated in poor prognostic subgroups and this phenomenon was associated with the down-regulation of its host gene COBLL1. Finally, we generated an independent model based on SNORA74A and SNORD116-18 expression, which appears to distinguish two different prognostic CLL groups. These data extend the view of sno/scaRNAs deregulation in cancer and may contribute to discover novel biomarkers associated with the disease and potentially useful to predict the clinical outcome of early stage CLL patients.

DESIGN
This series of microarray experiments contains the gene expression profiles of purified B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) cells obtained from 211 patients (Binet stage A), 6 normal controls from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (BC), and B-cell sub-populations from tonsils (3 naïve B-cells (N), 2 marginal zone (MZ)-like, 3 switched memory (SM) B-cells and 4 germinal center (GC) ). For gene and miRNA expression profiling experiments CLL cells were enriched by negative selection with the EasySep-Human B cell enrichment kit without CD43 depletion (Stem Cell Technologies) using the fully automated protocol of immunomagnetic cell separation with RoboSepTM (Stem Cell Technologies).

PLATFORM
GPL17047 [HuGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Array [HuGene10stv1_Hs_ENTREZG_15.0.0]

CITATIONS
24004562

