TITLE
Israeli acute paralysis virus – what we have learned about the virus since mysterious disappearance of the US honey bees known as Colony Collapse Disorder (CCD) in 2006

ORGANISM
Apis mellifera

SUMMARY
There were important gaps in our knowledge of Israeli acute paralysis virus (IAPV), when IAPV was tightly linked to bee Colony Collapse Disorder (CCD), the mysterious disease that, starting in 2006-2007, has been wiping out honey bees in the US.  To fill in these gaps we studied the molecular basis of transmission, pathogenesis, and genetic diversity of IAPV infection in honey bees.  We investigated the impact of IAPV infection on colony losses and host transcriptional response to IAPV infections, and exploited the potential of RNAi-based strategies for treating viral diseases in honey bees.  Our study clearly shows that IAPV has become established as a persistent infection and is highly prevalent in the honey bee population.  The existence of both horizontal and vertical transmission pathways of the virus likely accounts for the high prevalence of IAPV in bees.  While IAPV is probably not the only culprit responsible for CCD, its ability to cause increased mortality in honey bees is firmly demonstrated.  The phenotypic differences in pathology among different strains of IAPV may be due to their high level of standing genetic variation.   The JAK-STAT pathway, along with other signaling events such as mTOR and MAPK pathways, likely involves honey bees’ antiviral immune responses to the IAPV infection.   The identification of IAPV-encoded putative suppressor of RNAi and evidence that silencing the RNAi suppressor led to a significant reduction in IAPV replication in infected bees illustrates the therapeutic potential of targeting viral suppressor protein to reduce virus replication.  Our study gives direction for developing strategies to reduce colony losses due to viral diseases.

DESIGN
Adult worker bees and brood were collected from colonies that were declining and identified with IAPV infections and its control with 6 replications per group.

PLATFORM
GPL17049 UIUC Honey bee oligo 13K microarray v1

CITATIONS
25079600

