TITLE
ovation-Transcriptomic study of rice seed ageing

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa

SUMMARY
affy_rice_2012_01 - ovation - One of the key questions for future agriculture will be to save agronomical relevant biodiversity. To do so, it is important to select the best crop cultivars that will germinate efficiently (good seed vigor) and for a long period of time (good seed longevity). Surprisingly, while mankind rely heavily on cereals, very few studies have identified genes positively related to cereal seed vigor and longevity. To close this scientific gap, we aimed to identify genes positively involved in rice seed vigor and longevity. We thus used a “controlled deterioration treatment (Tesnier et al., 2002) to mimic natural seed ageing. Seeds are first equilibrated at 25°C and 85% relative hygrometry during three days. Then, during 15 days, three different batch of seeds are either (i) kept at 25°C and 85% RH (control seeds), (ii) placed at 40°C and 85% RH (loss of seed vigor) or (iii) placed at 45°C and 85% RH (loss of germination capacity). Finally, seeds are equilibrated at 25°C and 32% RH during three days. Using this CDT treatment, we obtained rice seeds with contrasted seed vigor or germination capacity. We extracted the total RNA from the embryos and we analysed their transcriptome using the Affymetrix Rice Genome Array.-We applied a Controlled Deterioration Treatment (CDT) to seeds from the reference rice cultivar Nipponbare. First, all seeds are equilibrated at 25°C and 85% relative hygrometry. Then, depending on the treatment, seeds are placed at 25, 40 or 45°C in 85% relative hygrometry before being finally equilibrated at 25°C and 32% relative hygrometry. The germination of the three seed batches was measured during five days with one measure every 8h. Seeds placed at 25°C during the whole experiment were similar to control seeds kept in the fridge and germinated at nearly 100% in 48h. Seeds placed at 40°C during 15 days germinate at 74% but show altered seedling phenotypes (loss of seed vigor). Finally, seeds placed at 45°C do not germinate.

DESIGN
6 arrays - rice; treated vs untreated comparison

