TITLE
Gene expression analysis of HaCaTs after non-thermal plasma treatment

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Investigation of gene expression in cultured human skin epithelial keratinocytes (HaCaT) following non-thermal plasma treatment for 60 s, compared to untreated control. Non-thermal atmospheric pressure plasma has recently gained attention in the field of biomedical and clinical applications. In the area of plasma medicine research one promising approach is to promote wound healing by stimulation of cells involved. To understand basic molecular and cellular mechanisms triggered by plasma treatment we investigated biological effects of an argon plasma jet (kinpen) on human epithelial skin cells. Consequently, whole-genome microarrays were used to analyze this interaction in detail and identified a statistically significant modification of 3,274 genes including 1,828 up- and 1,446 down-regulated genes. Particularly, plasma-treated cells are characterized by differential expression of a considerable number of genes involved in the response to stress. In this regard, we found a plasma-dependent regulation of oxidative stress answer and increased expression of enzymes of the antioxidative defense system (e.g. 91 oxidoreductases). Our results demonstrate that plasma induces cell reactions of stress-sensing but also of proliferative nature. Consistent with gene expression changes as well as Ingenuity Pathway Analysis prediction, we propose that stimulating doses of plasma may protect epithelial skin cells in wound healing by promoting proliferation and differentiation. In conclusion, gene expression profiling may become an important tool in identifying plasma-related changes of gene expression. Our results underline the enormous clinical potential of plasma as a biomedical tool for stimulation of epithelial skin cells We investigated biological effects of an argon plasma jet on HaCaTs. Microarray were used to analyzed this interaction in detail. The transcripts analyzed in this study are further described in Schmidt et al. (2013): Non-thermal plasma treatment is associated with changes in transcriptome of human epithelial skin cells. Accepted in Journal Free Radical Research

DESIGN
A study using total RNA recovered from at least 8 non-thermal plasma treated samples (300 ms*µl/cell) and untreated HaCaT controls.

PLATFORM
GPL8971 NimbleGen Homo sapiens HG18 60mer expr 4plex (4x72k)

CITATIONS
23668811

