TITLE
Signaling of Neisseria meningitidis MC58 mutants to primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
We examined the adherence-mediated signaling of meningococci to human cells by comparing gene expression profiles of primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) infected by piliated and adherent wild-type (WT), frpC/frpA-deficient mutant, or the non-adherent (ΔpilD) N. meningitidis MC58 bacteria defective in production of the type IV pilus, respectively. Surprisingly, no significant difference was found between the transcriptomes of HUVECs infected by bacteria producing, or not the RTX FrpC and FrpA proteins, thus failing to provide any hints on their biological activity. In contrast, pili-mediated adhesion of meningococci resulted in alterations of expression levels of human genes known to regulate apoptosis, cell proliferation, inflammatory response or adhesion. In particular, genes for signaling pathway proteins involved in early embryonic development, such as transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β)/Smad, Wnt/β-catenin, and Notch/Jagged were found to be upregulated upon adhesion of N. meningitidis together with genes for a number of transcription factors. This reveals that adhering piliated meningocci manipulate signaling pathways controlling human cell proliferation, survival and defense mechanisms, while establishing a commensal relationship with the host. Keywords: time course, infection response, genetic modification

DESIGN
Time courses of gene expression profiles of primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) during infection with piliated and adherent wild-type (WT), frpC/frpA-deficient mutant, or the non-adherent (ΔpilD) Neisseria meningitidis MC58 bacteria defective in production of the type IV pilus, were analyzed respectively. Total RNA isolated from uninfected HUVEC (reference) and HUVEC after 1, 4 or 6 hours of infection with N. meningitidis mutants was labeled according to standard Affymetrix protocol and hybridized to HG-U133A GeneChips. Data were analyzed by Robust Multi-array Analysis algorithm. For every condition at least two biological replicates were analyzed, totally representing 23 Affymetrix GeneChips.

PLATFORM
GPL96 [HG-U133A] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A Array

CITATIONS
16958858

