TITLE
Molecular profile of parvalbumin-immunoreactive neurons in superior temporal cortex in schizophrenia

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Dysregulation of pyramidal cell network function by the soma- and axon-targeting inhibitory neurons that contain the calcium-binding protein parvalbumin (PV) represents a core pathophysiological feature of schizophrenia. In order to gain insight into the molecular basis of their functional impairment, we used laser capture microdissection (LCM) to isolate PV-immunolabeled neurons from layer 3 of Brodmann’s area 42 of the superior temporal gyrus (STG) from postmortem schizophrenia and normal control brains. We then extracted ribonucleic acid (RNA) from these neurons and determined their messenger RNA (mRNA) expression profile using the Affymetrix platform of microarray technology. 739 mRNA transcripts were found to be differentially expressed in PV neurons in subjects with schizophrenia, including genes associated with WNT (wingless-type), NOTCH and PGE2 (prostaglandin E2) signaling, in addition to genes that regulate cell cycle and apoptosis. Of these 739 genes, only 89 (12%) were also differentially expressed in pyramidal neurons as found in the accompanying study, suggesting that the molecular pathophysiology of schizophrenia appears to be predominantly neuronal type-specific. Taken together, findings of this study provide a neurobiological framework within which hypotheses of the molecular mechanisms that underlie the dysfunction of PV neurons in schizophrenia can be generated and experimentally explored and, as such, may ultimately inform the conceptualization of targeted molecular intervention.

DESIGN
Gene expression microarray from mRNA isolated from parvalbumin cells in layer 3 of the STG from 8 normal controls  and 8 subjects with schizophrenia. There was no significant difference between diagnosis groups for age, sex, and post mortem interval (PMI).

PLATFORM
GPL1352 [U133_X3P] Affymetrix Human X3P Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

