TITLE
Toxicogenomic analysis of ionic silver and silver nanoparticles on the fathead minnow and implications to human health

ORGANISM
Pimephales promelas

SUMMARY
Nanoparticles are compounds of emerging concern with largely unknown risks for human and ecological health. It is crucial to evaluate their potential biological impact to prevent unintended adverse effects on human health and the environment. We analyzed the transcriptional effects of polyvinylpyrrolidone-coated silver nanoparticles (PVP-AgNPs) and silver nitrate (AgNO3) on the fathead minnow (Pimephales promelas) to understand their potential toxicity and adverse outcomes. We also tested the feasibility of the fathead minnow as an alternative species to elucidate potential adverse effects on humans. Fathead minnow females were exposed to either 4 µg/L of AgNO3 or 70 µg/L of PVP-AgNPs for 96h. Microarray analyses were performed on liver and brain. Functional analysis identified potential toxicity pathways and molecular initiating events (MIEs) that were confirmed with functional assays. Data suggested that AgNO3 and PVP-AgNPs had both common and distinct transcriptional effects. The nanoparticles were linked to neurotoxicity and oxidative stress, and identified as a dopamine receptor antagonist. Silver nitrate was also identified as a potential neurotoxicant and was confirmed as adrenergic and cannabinoid receptors antagonist.  While silver nitrate and PVP-AgNPs were both potential neurotoxicants, they appeared to act through different MIEs. Fathead minnow is a promising alternative species to elucidate potential adverse effects of relevance to human health.

DESIGN
We analyzed the transcriptional effects of polyvinylpyrrolidone-coated silver nanoparticles (PVP-AgNPs) and silver nitrate (AgNO3) on the fathead minnow (Pimephales promelas) to understand their potential toxicity and adverse outcomes. FHM were obtained from Aquatic Biosystems (Fort Collins, CO), held in aerated dechlorinated tap water and fed three times daily with Zeigler® AquaTox Feed Gardners, PA, USA). Fathead minnow females were exposed to either 4 µg/L of AgNO3 or 70 µg/L of PVP-AgNPs (Luna Innovations, Blackburn, VA) for 96h at 24°C ± 1 with a 90% water change at 48 hours. Microarray analyses were performed on liver and brain.

PLATFORM
GPL17098 Agilent-036574 FHM_8x60K_V2 [Probe name version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

