TITLE
Interactions of wheat aleurine and plant omega-3 fatty acids on the rat gut microbiota

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Microbiota from rats fed with wheat aleurone and plant omega fatty acids In this study we investigated how an AX-rich WA and ALA from linseed oil (LO) modulate the gut microbiota of rats. Wistar rats were fed a standard diet and received either an iso-energetic control oil (PO), control oil + aleurone (A+PO), linseed oil (LO) or linseed oil + aleurone (A+LO) during 12 weeks. Feacal samples were recovered after the 12 week treatments. DNA extractions were performed using using the Qiagen's DNA Stool Kit (Qiagen, West Sussex, UK). 10ng of DNA template were amplified by PCR (16S gene) and purified using Qiagen's Qiaquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen, West Sussex, UK). 1ug of purified PCR product were labelled with either Cy3 or Cy5 using Genomic DNA ULS Labelling kit (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA). 250ng of labelled DNA were hybridized on the microarray for 24h at 65°C. Washings were performed as recommended by the manufacturer. Microarray scanning was performed on a Surescan Microarray scanner (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA). Data were extracted using the Feature extraction software (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA). The retained intensity value for each probe was the ratio between the spot’s median intensity signals and the median of background signals.

DESIGN
A 13 chip study was realized to analyze the feacal microbiota of rats treated with either an iso-energetic control oil (PO), control oil + aleurone (A+PO), linseed oil (LO) or linseed oil + aleurone (A+LO) during 12 weeks. Each microarray corresponding to hybridization with 250ng of labelled 16S rRNA gene amplicons from 2 rat DNA faecal samples. Microbiota structure and diversity were assessed using the HuGChip (Tottey et al., 2013). Each probe (4441) was synthetized in three replicates. On the same array, 2 different samples were hybridized. One labelled with the Cy3 dye and one with the Cy5 dye. The results were processed as single channel (13 raw data files available on Series records for 25 samples).

PLATFORM
GPL16731 Agilent Human gut metagenome array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

