TITLE
Characterization of the transcriptomes of genetically diverse Listeria monocytogenes exposed to hyperosmotic and low temperature conditions

ORGANISM
Listeria monocytogenes

SUMMARY
A screening process was used to determine hyperosmotic as well as cold stress tolerance of a diverse set of Listeria monocytogenes strains and was based on the capacity to grow at sub lethal levels of NaCl and 4°C. Analysis of gene expression in cells adapted to cold and hyperosmotic stress revealed significant strain specificity in terms of individual gene expression profiles though general patterns of expression within functional gene subsets were largely similar. .  Strain ATCC19115 revealed 150 significantly up- and 146 down-regulated genes in cells adapted to both hyperosmotic and cold stress, 82 up- and 56 down-regulated genes were matching in response to both stresses in strain 70-1700, whereas ScottA, a relatively stress-tolerant strain, showed up-regulation of 77 genes whilst 106 genes were significantly down-regulated. Among these homologously expressed genes only 22 were found to be significantly up-regulated and only 7 were down-regulated in all three strains adapted to hyperosmotic stress and cold temperature, suggesting a dominating strain specific response.   Overall adaptation to hyperosmotic and low temperature growth conditions in three L. monocytogenes strains were found to have many parallels, especially when examined using a statistically-based ontological approach. Evidence was presented for strong activation of genes associated with protein synthesis, in particular those coding proteins of the ribosome and involved directly in transcription. Genes associated with DNA maintenance; modification to cell envelope, and cell division were also up-regulated. On the other hand strong suppression of genes associated with carbohydrate metabolism and transport as well as flagella assembly was evident in stress adapted cells most likely due to energy preservation via CodY regulon. This suggests that adaptation to these adverse conditions engages similar mechanisms to cope with the induced stressful environments. The microarray component of the experiments had the aim of determining:  i) To examine the gene expression responses of three L. monocytogenes strains that had different intrinsic salt resistances following adaptation to hyperosmotic stress.  ii) To examine the gene expression responses of three L. monocytogenes strains that had different intrinsic cold tolerances following adaptation to cold stress.  iii) To evaluate common pathways of adaptation to hyperosmotic and cold stresses

DESIGN
Control cultures  (four biological replicates; exception strain ATCC19115 for the 10%NaCl stress which had three biological replicates) were labeled with Cy3 (exception strain ATCC19115 for the 10%NaCl-3 dyeswapped, where the control was labeled with Cy5 and sample with Cy3) for each treatment sample for three different L. monocytogenes strains. Sample cultures (four biological replicates; exception strain ATCC19115 for the 10%NaCl which had three biological replicates) were labeled with Cy5 (exception strain ATCC19115 for the 10%NaCl-3 dyeswapped, where the control was labeled with Cy5 and sample with Cy3) for each treatment sample for three different L. monocytogenes strains.    Condition one –sub-lethal hyperosmotic stress:  Control culture (Cy3-labelled RNA, except ATCC19115 for the 10%NaCl-3 dyeswapped , where the control was labeled with Cy5 and sample with Cy3) - strains were grown to mid exponential growth phase at 25°C (in a shaking water bath) in brain-heart infusion broth.   Test cultures (Cy5-labelled RNA, except ATCC19115 for the 10%NaCl-3 dyeswapped , where the control was labeled with Cy5 and sample with Cy3) – strains grown to mid exponential growth at 25°C phase (in a shaking water bath) in BHI broth supplemented with 8% additional NaCl (strain 701700), 10% additional NaCl (strain ATCC19115) or 12% additional NaCl (ScottA).    Condition two – cold stress:  Control culture (Cy3-labelled RNA) - strains were grown to mid exponential growth phase at 25°C (in a shaking water bath) in brain-heart infusion broth.  Test cultures (Cy5-labelled RNA) – strains grown to exponential growth phase at 4°C in BHI broth.

