TITLE
Streptococcus suis 05ZY: control vs. treated by licochalcone A

ORGANISM
Streptococcus suis 05ZYH33

SUMMARY
Streptococcus suis is an important emerging worldwide pig pathogen and zoonotic agent with rapid evolution of virulence and drug resistance. Licochalcone A, used in traditional Chinese medicine, exhibits antimicrobial, antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities. Herein, a whole-genome DNA microarray was used to investigate the global transcriptional regulation of Streptococcus suis 05ZYH33 treated by subinhibitory concentration of licochalcone A. 132 genes were differentially regulated upon liochalcone A treatment, including 78 genes up-regulated and 54 genes down-regulated which included many central biological functions such as metabolism, transcription and translation. We tried to investigate the antimicrobial mechanism of licochalcone A in the aspect of bacterial cell cycle control. Our analysis indicated that licochalcone A might inhibit the growth of S. suis by controlling the replication initiation and cell division through amino acid metabolism.

DESIGN
A cDNA microarray imprinted with 2156 genes representing about 98% of Streptococcus suis serotype 2 genome was used for transcriptome analysis. For two-sample (reference vs. test) microarray hybridization, four independent bacterial cultures from each condition were prepared as biological replicates for RNA isolation. Four dual-fluorescence-labeled cDNA probes were prepared to hybridize with four slides, respectively. Pairwise comparisons were made using dye swaps to avoid labeling bias. A ratio of mRNA levels (test/reference) was calculated for each gene. Significant changes of gene expression were identified with the SAM software. After the SAM analysis, only genes with at least 2-fold changes in expression were collected for further analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL9675 Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology Streptococcus suis 05ZYH33 2.2K

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

