TITLE
Enhanced upregulation of CRH mRNA expression in the rat nucleus accumbens after a delayed second injection of methamphetamine

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Methamphetamine (METH) is a widely abused illicit amphetamine that causes acute biochemical and molecular changes in the brain.  However, there are very few studies that have investigated the long-term effects of a single METH exposure in adult animals. The purpose of this study was thus to determine the consequences of a single injection of METH (10) mg/kg) on the biochemical and transcriptional effects of a second challenge injection of the drug (2.5 mg/kg) given one month later. Towards that end, we measured monoamine levels and gene expression by microarray and quantitative PCR analyses in the nucleus accumbens (NAc) of 4 groups of rats: saline-pretreated and saline-challenged (SS); saline-pretreated and METH-challenged (SM); METH-pretreated and saline-challenged (MS); and METH-pretreated and METH-challenged (MM). The rats were euthanized 2 hours after the acute challenge injection and NAc samples were harvested. The acute METH challenge caused increases in NAc DA and HVA levels in both the SM and MM groups. Microarray analyses revealed that an injection of METH (2.5 mg/kg) produced acute changes (1.8-fold; p < 0.01) in the expression of 418 (358 up-, 60 downregulated) genes including several immediate early genes (IEGs) such as Arc, c-fos, and fosB in the SM group. Several neuropeptides including Cart, Crf (Crh), and vasopressin were upregulated in that group.  Injection of the higher dose of METH (10 mg/kg) did not influence monoamine levels but caused changes in 510 (345 up-, 165 downregulated) transcripts measured one month later (MS group). This list included Cart and Crf but not any IEGs. The MM group showed changes in 774 (572 up-, 202 downregulated) genes that also included vasopressin, Cart, and Crf whose expression was enhanced by the second METH injection.  Quantitative PCR confirmed the METH-induced changes in the expression of the neuropeptides. We also confirmed the METH-induced potentiation of Crf expression in the METH-pretreated group.  These observations suggest that a single injection of a moderate dose of METH can produce long-lasting changes in gene expression in the rodent NAc. The long-term increases in Crf expression also suggest that a single injection of a moderate METH dose can cause prolonged dysregulation in the endogenous stress system in the rat brain.

DESIGN
24 samples.  SS (4), SM (6), MS (7), MM (7)

PLATFORM
GPL6101 Illumina ratRef-12 v1.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

