TITLE
Characterization of the microbial community structure in Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus-infected Citrus plants treated with antibiotics in the field

ORGANISM
Citrus sinensis

SUMMARY
Huanglongbing (HLB) is a worldwide devastating disease of citrus. There are no effective control measures for this newly emerging but century-old disease. Previously, we reported a combination of Penicillin G and Streptomycin was effective in eliminating or suppressing the associated bacterium, ‘Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ (Las). Here we report the bacterial composition and community structure in HLB-affected citrus plants during a growing season and while being treated with antibiotic combinations PS (Penicillin G and Streptomycin) and KO (Kasugamycin and Oxytetracycline) using the Phylochip™ G3 array.

DESIGN
The antibiotic treatments were conducted on the randomized complete block design with four replicates. For each replicate, five HLB-affected, 7-year-old citrus trees (a unique hybrid, 10c-5-58, which is an open-pollinated seedling from the combination of Lee mandarin × Orlando tangelo) at the USHRL farm, 10 cm in diameter, were injected with either 100 ml of the antibiotic combination treatment PS (5 g of penicillin G potassium + 0.5 g of Streptomycin per tree) or the antibiotic treatment KO (2 g of oxytetracycline + 1.0 g of kasugamycin per tree). Five trees were injected with water as injection controls (CK). Injections were made using an Avo-Ject syringe injector (a catheter-tipped 60 ml syringe; Aongatete Coolstores Ltd., NZ) beginning in August of 2010. The tapered tip was firmly fitted into a 19/64-in (7.5 mm) diameter hole, ≈3 cm deep, drilled into the tree. The injector was kept in the tree and the treatment lasted for one week in each injection-trunk. Treatments were repeated every 2 months for one year and ceased in August of 2011. Before and during treatment more than 30 leaf samples per tree were taken from different positions around the tree canopies for qPCR assays at 2 month intervals.DNA for the PhyloChip™ G3 analysis, which was extracted from 20 samples of the same treatment, was pooled in equal amounts and quantified by the PicoGreen® method. The PhyloChipTM G3 analysis was conducted by Second Genome Inc. (San Francisco, CA).

PLATFORM
GPL17136 [LBL-Phy3b520660] Affymetrix PhyloChip G3 array

CITATIONS
23701743

