TITLE
Profiling of RNA Pol II occupancy in Drosophila neural stem cell populations using TaDa (Targeted DamID)

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Cell-type specific transcriptional profiling is key to understanding cell fate specification and function. In order to achieve this it has been necessary, to date, to isolate specific cell types from complex tissues. We have developed 'TaDa', a technique that enables cell-specific profiling without cell isolation.  TaDa permits genome-wide profiling of DNA- or chromatin-binding proteins without cell sorting, fixation or affinity purification. The method is simple, sensitive, highly reproducible and is in principle transferable to any model system. Here we show that TaDa can be used to identify transcribed genes in a cell-type specific manner. We profile the genome-wide binding of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) in adjacent, clonally related neural stem cells in intact Drosophila brains. Our data reveal the activity of non-canonical metabolic pathways in proliferating neuroepithelial cells, and highlight a possible role for the retinal determination gene regulatory network in patterning neural stem cell fates. We also identify temporal differences in the activity of signalling pathways that control neuroepithelial cell fate by profiling Pol II occupancy at two different stages of brain development. Using RNA Pol II TaDa to profile, in a cell-type specific manner, the transcriptional state of neuroepithelial cells at two stages of larval brain development. Closely related asymmetrically dividing neural stem cells (neuroblasts) were also profiled, in order to compare the transcriptomes of  two different types of neural stem cells.

DESIGN
3 biological relicates were performed for 3rd instar neuroepithelial cells (with one dye-swap). 2 biological relicates were performed for 3rd instar neuroblasts (with dye-swap). 2 biological relicates were performed for 1st instar neuroepithelial cells (with dye-swap). As additional supporting evidence for the Pol II TaDa technique, 2 biological relicates were performed for 3rd instar salivary glands (with dye-swap) in order to compare with previous Pol II-ChIP data for this tissue [PMID 22821985].

PLATFORM
GPL15641 NimbleGen Drosophila melanogaster Whole Genome 2.1M tiling array [100718_DM_5_Catalog_tiling_HX1]

CITATIONS
23792147

