TITLE
Changes in Mouse Uterine Lumenal Epithelial Cell Transcriptome in Estrus Compared to Proestrus

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The potential for xenoestrogens and other environmental chemicals to alter female reproductive function calls for the study of their affects on endogenous hormone-regulated gene expression pathways during uterine tissue remodeling which occurs as part of the menstrual/estrus cycle. However, our knowledge of these pathways is limited. Here, we characterize changes in the CD-1 mouse uterine luminal epithelial cell transcriptome during proestrus and estrus, which are regulated by estrogen and progesterone in preparation of the uterus for pregnancy. Mice were staged beginning at 6 wk of age and uterine horns were harvested at estrus and proestrus. RNA was extracted from lumenal epithelium of uterine horns. Microarray analysis identified 2,251 genes differentially expressed in estrus compared to proestrus in lumenal epithelial cells. These complement other studies where RNA was extracted from whole uterine horns of mice in estrus and proestrus (GSE43064).

DESIGN
Beginning on postnatal day 41, female CD-1 mice were monitored for reproductive stage cycle and total RNA was isolated from lumenal epithelium of uterine horns at estrus or proestrus. Tissue was collected on postnatal days 41-61. Samples were pooled for microarray analysis as follows. Seven litters were used to generate 2 tissue pools for estrus and 2 tissue pools for proestrus. Each pool was comprised of uterine tissue RNA from n=4-5 individual mice and n=3-4 individual litters. Fluorescent labeling of RNA and hybridization of the Alexa 555-labeled (green) and Alexa 647-labeled (red) RNA samples to Agilent-026655 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K v2 (Agilent Technology, Palo Alto, CA; catalog # G4846A) were carried out, with dye swapping for each estrus cycle stage comparison.

PLATFORM
GPL11202 Agilent-026655 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K v2 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
23740946

