TITLE
Functional Characterization of Fission Yeast Transcription Factors by Overexpression Analysis

ORGANISM
Schizosaccharomyces pombe

SUMMARY
In Schizosaccharomyces pombe, over 90% of transcription factor genes are nonessential. Moreover, the majority do not exhibit significant growth defects under optimal conditions when deleted, complicating their functional characterization and target gene identification. Here, we systematically overexpressed 99 transcription factor genes with the nmt1 promoter. Screening the overexpression array revealed that 64 transcription factor genes exhibited reduced fitness when ectopically expressed.  Cell cycle defects were also often observed. We further investigated three uncharacterized transcription factor genes (toe1+-toe3+) which displayed cell elongation when overexpressed. Ectopic expression of toe1+ resulted in a G1 delay while toe2+ and toe3+ overexpression produced an accumulation of septated cells with abnormalities in septum formation and nuclear segregation, respectively. Transcriptome profiling and ChIP-chip analysis of the transcription factor overexpression strains indicated that Toe1 activates target genes of the pyrimidine-salvage pathway, while Toe3 regulates target genes involved in polyamine synthesis. We also found that ectopic expression of the putative target genes SPBC3H7.05c, and dad5+ and SPAC11D3.06 could recapitulate the cell cycle phenotypes of toe2+ and toe3+ overexpression, respectively.  Furthermore, the phenotypes of toe1+and toe2+ overexpression could be suppressed by deletion of the putative target genes urg2+ and SPAC1399.04c, and SPBC3H7.05c, SPACUNK4.15 and rds1+, respectively. This study implicates new transcription factors and metabolism genes in cell cycle regulation and demonstrates the potential of systematic overexpression analysis to elucidate the function and target genes of transcription factors in S. pombe.

DESIGN
We generated 3 overexpression microarrays and 2 deletion microarray with dye swaps, 3 deletion microarrays with drug treatments with dye swaps, 1 deletion single replicate microarray experiment, and 3 single replicate chIP-chip experiments. The effect of the mutant strains were all compared to wild type or empyty vector strains except for two experiments one that looked at the toe1 mutant with and without chlorpromazine and another that looked at wild type with and without chlorpromazine.

