TITLE
Microarray-based gene expression profiling of peripheral blood mononuclear cells in dairy cows with experimental hypocalcaemia and milk fever

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from cows with experimentally induced hypocalcaemia or spontaneous milk fever were subject of an oligo-microarray analysis following quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR (q-PCR). In experimental hypocalcaemia induced by 10 % Na2EDTA infusion (n = 4), the microarray revealed that 32 genes were significantly up- or down-regulated compared to control treatment by 11 % CaEDTA infusion (n = 4). In milk fever cases (n = 8), the microarray demonstrated that 98 genes were expressed differentially higher or lower compared to healthy parturient cows (n = 5). From both data, five genes were selected to be strongly related to both experimental hypocalcaemia and milk fever. Additionally, another gene was judged to be specific for milk fever independent of hypocalcaemia. The mRNA expressions of these six genes in milk fever cases were verified by q-PCR, which were significantly higher or lower than those in healthy parturient cows.

DESIGN
In the experimental hypocalcemia study, four healthy nonpregnant, non-lactating ovariectomised Holstein cows were used. The experiment was performed according to a 2 × 2 crossover design with 2 weeks intervals. Cows were infused with either Na2EDTA (hypocalcaemic treatment) or CaEDTA (control treatment) solution during a period of 4 h. The animals were monitored for clinical signs of hypocalcaemia (dry nose, staggering, astasia, reduced ruminal activity, increased heart rate, increased respiratory frequency, sweating, and ear cold). Infusion of EDTA solution was temporarily suspended when hypocalcaemia induced astasia was represent. If affected cow stood again, EDTA infusion was resumed. PBMC samples were collected before the start of infusion (0 h; pre-treatment) and at 4 and 24 h after the start of infusion 24h and utilized for gene expression analysis of PBMC. In the spontaneous milk fever study, a total of 13 Holstein dairy cows, which were 8 parturient cows diagnosed with milk fever within 2 days postpartum and 5 clinically healthy parturient cows within 2 days after parturition (Group H), were used. All spontaneous milk fever cases showed hypocalcaemia ( < 1.8 mmol/l) in the blood samples obtained before the first treatment, and were treated by an intravenous infusion of a 20 % Ca borogluconate solution (500 ml). The milk fever cases were divided into two categories according to the reponse of the cows to the first Ca treatment: an immediate response in which the cow could stand within 1 day after a single Ca treatment (Group A, n = 4) and a requirement further treatment over 1 day after a single Ca treatment (Group B, n = 4). PBMC samples were collected vein just before the first Ca treatment in groups A and B and within 2 days postpartum in group H and utilized for gene expression analysis of PBMC.

PLATFORM
GPL9284 Agilent-018964 NIAS Designed Custom Agilent Bovine 15K Oligo DNA Microarray

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

