TITLE
Antivirulence activities of zinc ion and ZnO nanoparticle against Pseudomonas aeruginosa

ORGANISM
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1

SUMMARY
An antivirulence approach targets bacterial virulence rather than cell viability in the antibiotic approach that can readily lead to drug resistance. Opportunistic human pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa produces a variety of virulence factors, and biofilm cells of this bacterium are much more resistant to antibiotics than planktonic cells. To identify novel inorganic antivirulence compounds, the dual screenings of thirty-six metal ions were performed to identify that zinc ions and ZnO nanoparticle inhibited the pyocyanin production and biofilm formation in P. aeruginosa without affecting the growth of planktonic cells. Moreover, zinc ion and ZnO nanoparticle markedly reduced the production of 2-heptyl-3-hydroxy-4(1H)-quinolone and siderophore pyochelin, while increased the production of another sideropore pyoverdine and swarming motility. Further, zinc ion and ZnO nanoparticle clearly suppressed hemolytic activity in P. aeruginosa. Transcriptome analyses showed that ZnO nanoparticle induced zinc cation efflux pump czc operon, porin genes (oprD and opdT), and Pseudomonas type III repressor A ptrA, while repressed pyocyanin-related phz operon, which partially explains the phenotypic changes. Overall, ZnO nanoparticle is a potential candidate for use in an antivirulence approach against persistent P. aeruginosa infection.

DESIGN
P. aeruginosa Genechip Genome Array (Affymetrix, P/N 900339) was used in order to study the cells after the addition of ZnO nanoparticles. DNA microarray analysis with one biological replicate was performed with an Affymetrix system. P. aeruginosa was inoculated in 25 ml of LB medium in 250 ml shaker flasks with overnight cultures (1 : 100 dilution). Cells were cultured for 5 h with shaking at 250 rpm with and without ZnO nanoparticles (1 mM). Before sample collection, RNase inhibitor (RNAlater, Ambion, TX, USA) was added, and the cells were immediately chilled with dry ice and 95% ethanol (to prevent RNA degradation) for 30 s before centrifugation at 16,000 g for 2 min. The cell pellets were immediately frozen with dry ice and stored at –80°C. Total RNA was isolated using a Qiagen RNeasy mini Kit (Valencia, CA, USA).

PLATFORM
GPL84 [Pae_G1a] Affymetrix Pseudomonas aeruginosa Array

CITATIONS
24958247

