TITLE
Hypoxia/Anoxia

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The environment inside even a small tumor is characterized by total (anoxia) or partial oxygen deprivation, hypoxia. It has been shown that radiotherapy and some conventional chemotherapies may be less effective in hypoxia, and therefore it is important to investigate how different drugs act in different microenvironments. In the associated study we performed a large screening of the effects of 19 clinically used or experimental chemotherapeutic drugs on four different cell lines in conditions of normoxia, hypoxia and anoxia. A panel of 19 commercially available drugs: 5-fluorouracil, acriflavine, bortezomib, cisplatin, digitoxin, digoxin, docetaxel, doxorubicin, etoposide, gemcitabine, irinotecan, melphalan, mitomycin c, rapamycin, sorafenib, thalidomide, tirapazamine, topotecan and vincristine were tested for cytotoxic activity on the cancer cell lines A2780 (ovarian), ACHN (renal), MCF-7 (breast), H69 (SCLC) and U-937 (lymphoma). Parallel aliquots of the cells were grown at different oxygen pressures and after 72 hours of drug exposure viability was measured with the fluorometric microculture cytotoxicity assay (FMCA). Sorafenib, irinotecan and docetaxel were in general more effective in an oxygenated environment, while cisplatin, mitomycin c and tirapazamine were more effective in a low oxygen environment. Surprisingly, hypoxia in H69 and MCF-7 cells mostly rendered higher drug sensitivity. In contrast ACHN appeared more sensitive to hypoxia, giving slower proliferating cells, and consequently, was more resistant to most drugs. Gene expression analysis was performed on MCF-7 cells after 90 hours in either anoxic or hypoxic conditions, and compared to cells grown in a regular cell incubator. The gene expression analysis was performed to validate that the cells were hypoxic/anoxic and showed the characteristic hypoxia response.

DESIGN
Microarray based mRNA profiling was used to charactarize cells grown in hypoxia and anoxia. In the associated study we performed a large screening of the effects of 19 clinically used or experimental chemotherapeutic drugs on four different cell lines in conditions of normoxia, hypoxia and anoxia. We fin that hypoxia/anoxia render cancer cells both more resistant and more sensistive, depending of the type of drug used. The gene expression analysis was performed to validate that the cells really were hypoxic/anoxic and showed the characteristic hypoxia response. The cell line used for the gene expression analysis was MCF-7.

PLATFORM
GPL16686 [HuGene-2_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 2.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

