TITLE
Genome-wide analysis of differentially expressed genes and splicing isoforms in clear cell Renal Cell Carcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In this study we performed a genome wide analysis of the entire complement of mRNAs in clear cell renal cell carcinomas (ccRCC) by means of the Affymetrix Exon Array platform. The analyses were performed both at gene and exon level. Under our parameters over 2,000 genes resulted differentially expressed, and about 250 genes resulted alternative spliced showing differential inclusion of specific cassette exons comparing tumor and non tumoral tissues.

DESIGN
20 total samples were used for exon array analysis: 10 ccRCC tumor sample (T) and their matched non-tumor (NT) kidney tissues samples. All exon array data were analyzed using Partek Genomic Suite 6.4 software (Partek). The robust multi-array average (RMA) algorithm was used for the gene- and exon-level intensity analyses. Data were ﬁltered to consider only those probe sets included in the “Core Meta-Probeset”. Lists of genes and exons with significant variation of the expression levels were generated by using a 0.01 FDR criterion as a significant cutoff. Partek list of significant exon-level probesets (FDR corrected p-value < 0.01) and exon level ANOVA test list were used to create - by an ad hoc Python script - a database of significant probesets from Exon Array experiments. To make more stringent the analysis criteria we excluded from the final exon lists all those cases in which Exon Array revealed a significant change at gene-level. This database we created has been used to explore simple exon skipping events using as reference ASPicDB single exon skipping splicing events after mapping Affymetrix probesets on ASPicDB .gtf files. A single exon from the Partek list was defined significantly skipped only if its adjacent exons were not, by using 0.01 and 0.05 p-value criterions as a significant cutoff for the “skipped” and adjacent exons, respectively.

PLATFORM
GPL5175 [HuEx-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version] GPL5188 [HuEx-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0 ST Array [probe set (exon) version]

CITATIONS
24194935

