TITLE
Response and adaptation to growth with low glucose concentration

ORGANISM
Escherichia coli

SUMMARY
The faecal indicator bacterium Escherichia coli K12 was used to study the cellular events that take place at the transcription level using the microarray technology during short-term (physiological) and long-term (genetic) adaptation to slow growth under limited nutrient supply. Short-term and long-term adaptation were assessed by comparing the mRNA levels isolated after 40 or 500 hours of glucose-limited continuous culture at a dilution rate of 0.3 h-1 with those from batch culture with glucose excess. Keywords: glucose-limited continuous culture, adaptation, microarray, high affinity transport systems, transcriptome, Escherichia coli

DESIGN
Wild-type Escherichia coli K12 MG 1655 (ATCC 700926) was grown at 37 °C in mineral medium. Growth was followed by measuring OD546 in regular intervals to confirm that cells were growing at u­max (0.63 ± 0.02 h-1). A sample for transcriptome analysis was taken from the batch exponential phase at an OD546 of ~0.4, and immediately after sampling the medium flow was started for continuous cultivation with a dilution rate of 0.3 h-1. Steady-state with respect to biomass and residual glucose concentrations was reached approximately 15 hours after this manipulation. 40 and 500 hours after switching to the glucose-limited continuous culture mode 800 ml of culture liquid was withdrawn from the chemostat, immediately cooled down on crushed ice and cells were collected by centrifugation at 4 °C. Total RNA from E. coli cells was isolated as described earlier (Sambrook et al., 1989). RNA in samples was quantified spectrophotometrically by measuring extinction at 260 nm and purity (free from DNA) was checked by gel electrophoresis. Synthesis of cDNA from RNA was performed with the CyScribe First-Strand cDNA Labelling Kit (Amersham Bioscience, Little Chalfont, England). The purified cDNA was concentrated to 5 ul and was mixed with 120 ul of hybridization buffer (MWG-Biotech AG), heated to 95 °C for 3 min and cooled down on ice for 3 min. The hybridization mixture was then added to the microarray slide and covered with a coverslip. The hybridisation slide was incubated over night at 42 °C. After the hybridization step the slide was washed three times, the first time for 5 min in 2x (times concentrated) SSC - 0.1 % SDS, the second time for 5 min in 1x SSC, and finally for 5 min in 0.1x SSC. SSC buffer was prepared as 20x solution containing 0.3M Na-citrate and 3M NaCl at pH 7.0. The slides were dried by centrifugation at room temperature for 2 min at 500g. Microarray slides were scanned using the Affymetrix 428TM Array Scanner (High Wycombe, UK). Spot intensities and corresponding background signals were quantified with the Affymetrix JaguarTM software version 2.0. Further data analysis was performed with the program GeneSpring from Silicon Genetics (Redwood City, USA). Induction factors were calculated from the Cy3 and Cy5 signal intensities of the spot. Spots with signal intensity below a value of 50 were excluded from the analysis and the minimal induction factor was set to 0.01. The normalization was performed with the 50th percentile distribution of remaining spots after background correction. The mean value of the induction factors of a specific gene was calculated from three replicates. Biological experiments were carried out three times, which provided three biological repeats. Data from the independent experiments were combined, genes that were differentially regulated > 2 and < 0.5 (t-test, p < = 0.05) were defined as being statistically significant.

PLATFORM
GPL534 MWG E. coli K12 Array

CITATIONS
16804185

