TITLE
Oncogenic MyD88 Mutants Require Toll-like Receptors

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In the activated B-cell-like (ABC) subtype of diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), the most frequent gain-of-function mutations target MyD88, a signaling adapter for Tolllike receptors (TLRs). The most prevalent oncogenic mutant, MyD88 L265P, occurs in 29% of cases and is the most active in engaging the NF-kappaB pathway. Here we show that MyD88 mutants do not function autonomously, but rather require TLR7, TLR9, and to a lesser extent, TLR4 to promote the survival of ABC DLBCL cells. Unlike wild type MyD88, MyD88 mutants associate constitutively with TLR7 and TLR9 in ABC DLBCL cells. Like ligand-induced TLR7/9 signaling in normal immune cells, the survival of ABC DLBCL cell lines depends upon translocation of TLR7 and TLR9 to acidic endolysosomes, where proteolytic processing of their ligand binding ectodomains is required for their oncogenic signaling. ABC DLBCL viability also depends upon CD14, a co-receptor for TLR7 and TLR9 that promotes engagement of nucleic acid ligands by these receptors. Point mutations in the TLR7 or TLR9 ectodomains that abrogate ligand binding and/or signaling were incapable of sustaining ABC DLBCL survival. An inhibitory oligonucleotide that suppresses TLR9 responses in normal B cells blocked NF-kappaB signaling and survival of ABC DLBCL lines. Together, these data suggest that an endogenous TLR ligand may play a pathogenic role in ABC DLBCL and provide a rationale for targeting TLR signaling to improve therapy of this aggressive lymphoma.

DESIGN
Gene expression was analyzed using Agilent human 2-color 4X44K oligo gene expression arrays. Cell line, TMD8 ABC-DLBCL, was infected with control (shControl, Cy3), shLTR7 (Cy5) or shLTR9 (Cy5) and changes in gene expression were monitored on day 1 and day 2 after induction of the shRNA with doxycycline, co-hybridizing control and experimental samples (Cy3+Cy5), for a total of 4 arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL4133 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

