TITLE
A functional screen for copper homeostasis genes identifies a pharmacologically tractable cellular system

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
Copper is an essential component of cytochrome C oxidase (i.e. complex IV of the electron transport chain), and is thus critical for the survival of aerobic organisms. If copper is not properly regulated in the body however, it can be extremely cytotoxic and genetic mutations that compromise copper homeostasis result in severe clinical phenotypes. Understanding how cells maintain optimal copper levels is therefore highly relevant to human health. We found that addition of copper to culture medium leads to increased respiratory growth of yeast, a phenotype which we then systematically and quantitatively measured in 5050 homozygous diploid deletion strains using microarrays.

DESIGN
In the yeast homozygous gene deletion collection, both copies of every non-essential gene are deleted in a diploid strain. Each strain contains unique 20-bp “barcode” sequences flanked by common priming sites, allowing the relative abundance of individual strains to be quantitatively monitored within a pool of competitively-grown strains. To identify genes that are important for Cu-dependent respiratory growth, we measured the fitness of 5050 homozygous deletion strains in parallel in rich media (i.e. Yeast Extract, Peptone) using either dextrose, ethanol, glycerol, or lactate as a carbon source, in the presence or absence of 500 µM CuSO4 for 9 generations. Each condition was tested in triplicate. Please note that there is a large percentage of null-values (i.e. Not Available) in the respiration deficient-pool samples because the respiration deficient pool consists of only a small subset of the complete pool (represented by 331 barcodes instead of 9937). For our analysis we discarded the remaining barcodes by assigning the null-value to them.

PLATFORM
GPL17030 Affymetrix S. cerevisiae TAG4 101K array [GenFlex_Tag_16K_v2]

CITATIONS
24708151

