TITLE
Epigenetic determinants of muscle stem cell quiescence and chronological aging

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Skeletal muscle is a post-mitotic tissue that exhibits an extremely low turnover in the absence of disease or injury. At the same time, muscle possesses remarkable regenerative capacity mediated by satellite cells (SCs) that reside in close association with individual myofibers, underneath the fiber’s basal lamina. Consistent with the low turnover of the muscle, SCs in adult animals are mitotically quiescent and therefore provide an excellent model to study stem cell quiescence. As an organism grows older, the resident stem cells are exposed to a deteriorating environment and experience chronological aging. In stem cells with high turnover, the effects of chronological aging are superimposed upon the effects of the replicative aging that results from DNA replication and cell division. On the contrary, SCs experience minimal replicative aging due to their low turnover. They are thus a good model to study the consequence of chronological aging of quiescent stem cells. We performed microarray analysis of quiescent and activated SCs from both young and aged mice to understand the global gene expression profile underlying stem cell properties such as quiecence and self-renewal, and to understand how the transcriptome of a quiescent stem cell pouplation changes with age.

DESIGN
VCAM+/CD31-/CD45-/Sca1- quiescent satellite cells (QSCs) were isolated by FACS from hindlimb muscle of uninjured 2-3- or 22-24-month old mice. Activated satellite cells (ASCs) were isolated from hindlimb muscles of BaCl2-injured mice of the same age 36, 60 and 84 hours after injury using the same cell surface marker combination. YFP-expressing cells were isolated from 2-3-month old Pax7CreER/+; ROSA26eYFP/+ mice in which satellite cells are labeled geneticall by YFP expression. Total RNA was extracted from cells with the Trizol reagent according to manufacturer's instructions. RNA was then processed and assayed with Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
23810552

