TITLE
Differential DNA methylation regions in cytokine and transcription factor genomic loci associate with childhood physical aggression

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Animal and human studies suggest that inflammation is associated with behavioral disorders including aggression. We have recently shown that physical aggression of boys during childhood is strongly associated with reduced plasma levels of cytokines IL-1a, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8 and IL-10, later in early adulthood (Provencal et al., unpublished data). This study tests the hypothesis that there is an association between differential DNA methylation regions in cytokine genes in T cells and monocytes DNA in adult subjects and a trajectory of physical aggression from childhood to adolescence. We compared the methylation profiles of the entire genomic loci encompassing the IL-1a, IL-6, IL-4, IL10 and IL8 and three of their regulatory transcription factors (TF) NFkB1, NFAT5 and STAT6 genes in adult males on a chronic physical aggression trajectory (CPA) and males with the same background who followed a normal physical aggression trajectory (control group). We used the method of methylated DNA immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) with comprehensive cytokine gene loci and TF loci microarray hybridization, statistical analysis and false discovery rate correction.

DESIGN
We recruited two groups of Caucasian males who were born in families with a low socioeconomic status and were living at the time of the present study within 200km from our laboratory. The first group, composed of 8 subjects, had a history of chronic physical aggression from age 6 to 15 years (chronic physical aggression group, CPA). The second group, composed of 12 subjects, was recruited from the same longitudinal studies but included only those who did not have a history of chronic physical aggression from age 6 to 15 (Control group, CG).  Using custom-designed microarrays with 44K probes tiling cytokines IL-1a, IL-6, IL-4, IL10 and IL8 and three of their regulatory transcription factors (TF) NFkB1, NFAT5 and STAT6, we obtained DNA methylation profiles by meDIP-chip.  Each profile was generated in triplicate.

PLATFORM
GPL17186 Human aggressivity cytokine loci tiling for ChIP (Agilent-021772; genome assembly hg18)

CITATIONS
23977113

