TITLE
Gene expression analysis of wild type Pectobacteriumwasabie SCC3193 wildtype compared to a SCC3193 inactivation mutant of RsmA, inactivation mutant of ExpA and an ExpA RsmA double inactivation mutant.

ORGANISM
Pectobacterium wasabiae

SUMMARY
The phytopathogen Pectobacterium wasabiae SCC3193 is a model for research on virulence regulation in soft rot pathogens. Two proteins acting as global regulators of the expression on genes involved in virulence in SCC3193 are ExpA, a DNA binding transcriptional regulator, and RsmA, an RNA binding post transcriptional regulator. Studies of related enterobacterial phytopathogens suggest that homologues of ExpA (GacA) affect gene expression partly by modulating RsmA-like protein activity. However, the exact extent of this regulon overlap has not been mapped. To elucidate the role of RsmA in ExpA controlled gene expression goes through RsmA in P. wasabiae we performed a gene expression microarray analysis of the wild type strain, an expA mutant, an rsmA mutant, and an expA rsmA double mutant. The microarray-based data of various virulence related genes was confirmed through quantitative RT-PCR. Subsequently, assays were made to link observed transcriptomic differences to changes in growth rate, PCWDE production, and virulence in planta between the four strains. We could conclude that the majority of ExpA regulation seems routed via RsmA modulation. However we could identify genes involved in electron transport, oligogalacturonide transport and metabolism, which ExpA seems to influence independently of RsmA, directly or indirectly.

DESIGN
Gene expression analysis from P. wasabie SCC3193 wildtype, SCC3193 rsmA mutant, SCC3193 expA mutant and SCC3193 expA rsmA double mutant was performed on RNA samples extraxcted from the strains at late-logarithmic (late-log) and early stationary (stat) growth phase. Strains were grown in liquid hrp inducing minimal medium cultures supplemented with 0.4% polygalacturonic acid at 200 rpm shaking and 28 degrees celsius. Three biological replicates were used from each strain at each growth phase point.

