TITLE
Identity of the human cancer cell DNA hypermethylome revealed by gene expression profiling

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Altered gene expression is a hallmark of human cancers and arises in part through abnormal epigenetic regulation of gene transcription. The best characterized epigenetic alteration involves tumor suppressor gene inactivation via transcriptional repression associated with aberrant DNA hypermethylation of promoter region CpG islands1. Despite characterization of a growing number of such genes, the majority have yet to be identified.  We now describe a genome wide microarray gene expression approach for human colorectal cancer cells, which can efficiently identify hundreds of hypermethylated genes for any cancer type. We compared isogenic cells altered pharmacologically versus genetically to induce genomic demethylation, to pinpoint genes activated by DNA demethylation, but not by inhibition of class I and II histone deacetylases (HDACs).  We achieve an 82% success rate in predicting genes with densely hypermethylated CpG islands and complete gene silencing. The genes are similarly hypermethylated in primary tumors and have previously undetected tumor suppressor functions.  Our approach provides the first highly efficient, comprehensive, platform for defining the cancer “DNA hypermethylome " Keywords: gene expression profiling of pharmacological and genetic human cancer cells

DESIGN
Cell culture and treatment.  HCT116 cells and isogenic genetic knockout derivatives were maintained as previously described14. For drug treatments, log phase HCT116 cells were cultured in McCoys 5A media (Invitrogen) containing 10% BCS and 1x penicillin/streptomycin with 5 u­M 5aza-deoxycytidine (DAC) (Sigma; stock solution: 1mM in PBS) for 96 hours, replacing media and DAC every 24 hours.  Cell treatment with 300nM Trichostatin A (Sigma; stock solution: 1.5mM dissolved in ethanol) was performed for 18 hours. Control cells underwent mock treatment in parallel with addition of equal volume of PBS or ethanol without drugs. Microarray analysis.  Total RNA was harvested from log phase cells using the Qiagen kit according to the manufacturers instructions, including a DNAase step.  RNA was quantified using the NanoDrop ND-100 followed by quality assessment with 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies).  RNA concentrations for individual samples were greater than 200ng/ul, with 28s/18s ratios greater than 2.2 and RNA integrity numbers of 10 (highest).  Sample amplification and labeling procedures were carried out using the Low RNA Input Fluorescent Linear Amplification Kit (Agilent Technologies) according to the manufacturers instructions.  The labeled cRNA was purified using the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) and quantified. RNA spike-in controls (Agilent Technologies) were added to RNA samples before amplification.  0.75 microgram of samples labeled with Cy3 or Cy5 were mixed with control targets (Agilent Technologies), assembled on Oligo Microarray, hybridized, and processed according to the Agilent microarray protocol.  Scanning was performed with the Agilent G2565BA microarray scanner under default settings recommended by Agilent Technologies. Data analysis. All arrays were subject to quality checks recommended by the manufacturer.  Images were visually inspected for artifacts and distributions of signal and background intensity of both red and green channels were examined to identify anomalous arrays.  No irregularities were observed, and all arrays were retained and used.  All calculations were performed using the R statistical computing platform37 and packages from Bioconductor bioinformatics software project38.  The log ratio of red signal to green signal was calculated after background-subtraction and LoEss normalization as implemented in the limma package from Bioconductor39,40. Individual arrays were scaled to have the same inter-quartile range (75th percentile -25th percentile) Log fold changes were averaged over dye-swap replicate microarrays to produce a single set of expression values for each condition.

PLATFORM
GPL1708 Agilent-012391 Whole Human Genome Oligo Microarray G4112A (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
17892325

