TITLE
Dietary switch reveals fast coordinated gene expression changes in Drosophila melanogaster.

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Dietary restriction (DR) is one of the most studied interventions known to extend life span. The robustness of its effect across species suggests the existence of conserved mechanisms to reduce mortality rates and increase longevity. However, because DR elicits a large number of physiological changes, many of which are unrelated to the longevity response, it has been difficult to identify these specific mechanisms. Whole-genome gene expression studies have typically reported several hundreds to thousands of differentially expressed genes in response to DR. The fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster shows a remarkable response to a change in diet: after a switch to DR, food mortality rates drop within 2-4 days to the same level as cohorts continuously on DR. Based on this observation, we utilized a novel experimental design to enrich for genes directly associated with the longevity response. By profiling gene expression in a cohort of fruit flies that were switched from normal food to DR we were able to partition genes in several classes with distinct patterns of expression.

DESIGN
Canton-S flies were kept at 25˚C in a temperature-controlled incubator at 50% humidity with a 12 hour on/off light cycle. The flies were sorted into vials at a density of 25 males and 25 females per vial, randomly divided into treatment groups and passed every day on either Control Food (CF, 150 g/L sucrose, 150 g/L autolysed yeast, and 20 g/L agar, all w/v) or Restricted Food (RF, 50 g/L sucrose, 50 g/L autolysed yeast, and 20 g/L agar, all w/v) and the number of dead flies recorded. On day 40, half of the flies on Control Food were switched to the Restricted Food. During the course of the experiment, age-specific instantaneous mortality rate was analyzed and the separation of mortality rate between the food conditions was verified before the switch. Flies were sorted under light CO2 and collected at fixed time intervals during (0 = time of switch), and after (2, 4, 6, 8, 12, 18, 24, 32, 40, 48, 56, 72 hours after) the switch time point via snap freezing in liquid nitrogen and were stored at −80°C. Heads and thorax of female flies were collected for microarray experiments.

PLATFORM
GPL1322 [Drosophila_2] Affymetrix Drosophila Genome 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

