TITLE
Gene expression profiling in the largemouth bass ovary following sub-chronic dietary exposures to the organochlorine pesticides p,p’ DDE and methoxychlor

ORGANISM
Micropterus salmoides

SUMMARY
Largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides) (LMB) inhabiting Lake Apopka, Florida are exposed to high levels of organochlorine pesticides (OCPs) that exert effects through multiple modes of action.  The objectives of this study were to assess the impacts of two OCPs (p,p'-Dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene; p,p’ DDE and methoxychlor; MXC) on the reproductive axis of LMB.  Female LMB were fed coated feed over 84 days of either 125 (p,p’ DDE), 10 (MXC), or 0 (control) ppm (mg/kg).  In addition, due to the fact that p,p’ DDE and MXC are suspected anti-androgens, the potent anti-androgenic pharmaceutical flutamide (FLUT) was also fed to a separate group of LMB at 750 ppm.  After 84 days, LMB significantly incorporated p,p’ DDE and MXC into muscle and ovary tissue. Gonadal histology and plasma sex steroids were not significantly different than controls after being fed contaminants.  Microarray analysis revealed that p,p’ DDE and FLUT regulated more genes in common that either chemical compared to MXC, consistent with data suggesting that p,p’ DDE is a more potent anti-androgen than MXC.  There was a significant positive correlation between 71 commonly regulated genes in all three treatments, suggesting that these transcripts may be responding to a common anti-androgenic mode of action.  Cell processes affected by all three treatments included leukocyte cell adhesion, ossification, platelet function and inhibition, xenobiotic metabolism, fibrinolysis, and thermoregulation.  Most striking was that all three chemicals depressed gene networks related to immune function and inflammation.  This study adds to a growing number of fish transcriptomics studies investigating chemicals with an anti-androgenic MOA.

DESIGN
4 biological replicates per group; control, methoxychlor, p,p DDE, and flutamide

PLATFORM
GPL13229 LMB microarray 15K (Agilent format)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

