TITLE
Molecular impact of juvenile hormone agonists on neonatal Daphnia magna

ORGANISM
Daphnia magna

SUMMARY
Daphnia magna has been used extensively to evaluate organism- and population-level responses to pollutants in acute toxicity and reproductive toxicity tests.  We have previously reported that exposure to juvenile hormone (JH) agonists results in a reduction of reproductive function and production of male offspring in a cyclic parthenogenesis, D. magna. Recent advances in molecular techniques have provided tools to better understand the responses to pollutants in aquatic organisms including D. magna. DNA microarray was used to evaluate gene expression profiles of neonatal daphnids exposed to JH agonists; methoprene (125, 250 and 500 ppb), fenoxycarb (0.5, 1 and 2 ppb), and epofenonane (50, 100 and 200 ppb). Exposure to these JH analogs resulted in chemical specific patterns of gene expression. The heat map analyses based on hierarchical clustering revealed a similar pattern between treatments with a high dose of methoprene and with epofenonane. In contrast, treatment with low to middle doses of methoprene resulted in similar profiles to fenoxycarb treatments. Hemoglobin and JH epoxide hydrolase genes clustered to be JH-responsive genes. These data suggest that fenoxycarb has high activity as a JH agonist, methoprene shows high toxicity and epofenonane works through a different mechanism compared with other JH analogs, agreeing with data of previously reported toxicity tests. In conclusion, D. magna DNA microarray is useful for classification of JH analogs and identification of JH-responsive genes.

DESIGN
Juvenile hormone agonists induced gene expression in daphnids neonates was measured at 48 hours after exposure to methoprene (125, 250, 500 ppb), fenoxycarb (0.5, 1, 2 ppb), epofenonane (50, 100, 200) and DMF as a control.  Three independent experiments were performed at each chemicals.

PLATFORM
GPL17297 Agilent-020586 Daphnia3_1_Of_1 4x44k custom array (Probename version)

CITATIONS
24038158

