TITLE
The ABRF Next-Generation Sequencing Study (ABRF-NGS): Multi-platform and cross-methodological reproducibility of transcriptome profiling by RNA-seq [Ion Torrent PGM]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens ; synthetic construct

SUMMARY
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology applications like RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) have dramatically expanded the potential for novel genomics discoveries, but the proliferation of various platforms and protocols for RNA-seq has created a need for reference data sets to help gauge the performance characteristics of these disparate methods.  Here we describe the results of the ABRF-NGS Study on RNA-seq, which leverages replicate experiments across multiple sites using two reference RNA standards tested with four protocols (polyA selected, ribo-depleted, size selected, and degraded RNA), and examined across five NGS platforms (Illumina’s HiSeqs, Life Technologies’ Personal Genome Machine and Proton, Roche 454 GS FLX, and Pacific Biosciences RS).  These results show high (R2 > 0.9) intra-platform consistency across test sites, high inter-platform concordance (R2 > 0.8) for transcriptome profiling, and a large set of novel splice junctions observed across all platforms.  Also, we observe that protocols using ribosomal RNA depletion can both salvage degraded RNA samples and also be readily compared to polyA-enriched fractions.  These data provide a broad foundation for standardization, evaluation and improvement of RNA-seq methods.

DESIGN
Two reference RNA standards tested with four protocols (polyA selected, ribo-depleted, size selected, and degraded RNA), and examined across five NGS platforms (Illumina’s HiSeqs, Life Technologies’ Personal Genome Machine and Proton, Roche 454 GS FLX, and Pacific Biosciences RS). Please note that the samples were named following the ABRF-Platform-Site-Sample-Replicate# format. For example, ABRF-454-CNL-A-1 means Sample A was run on 454 platform at Cornell and this is the first replicate, and  ABRF-454-CNL-A-2 means the same exact sample was ran with same machine at same location and is 2nd replicate.

PLATFORM
GPL17301 Ion Torrent PGM (Homo sapiens) GPL17302 Ion Torrent PGM (synthetic construct)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

