TITLE
Juvenile hormone regulation of Drosophila aging

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Background. Juvenile hormone (JH) has been demonstrated to control adult lifespan in a number of non-model insects where surgical removal of the corpora allata eliminates the hormone’s source. In contrast, little is known about how juvenile hormone affects adult Drosophila melanogaster.  Previous work suggests that insulin signaling may modulate Drosophila aging in part through its impact on juvenile hormone titer, but no data yet addresses whether reduction of juvenile hormone is sufficient to control Drosophila life span.  Here we adapt a recent genetic approach to knock out the corpora allata in adult Drosophila melanogaster and characterize adult life history phenotypes produced by reduction of juvenile hormone. With this system we test potential explanations for how juvenile hormone modulates aging. Conclusions. Reduced juvenile hormone alone is sufficient to extend lifespan of Drosophila melanogaster. Reduced juvenile hormone limits reproduction by inhibiting the production of yolked eggs, and this may arise because juvenile hormone is required for the post-eclosion development of vitellogenin-producing adult fat body. Our data do not support a mechanism for juvenile hormone control of longevity simply based on reducing the physiological costs of reproductive. Nor does the longevity benefit appear to function through mechanisms by which dietary restriction extends longevity. We identify transcripts that change in response to juvenile hormone independent of reproductive state and suggest these represent somatically expressed genes that could modulate how juvenile hormone controls persistence and longevity.

DESIGN
Four genotypes were analyzed. They are CA knockout (CAKO), wildtype (wDah/w1118 ), CAKO with OvoD1 mutation and control (wDah/w1118) with OvoD1 mutation. Three biological replicates for each genotype.

PLATFORM
GPL1322 [Drosophila_2] Affymetrix Drosophila Genome 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
23866071

