TITLE
Genes Required for and Effects of Inducible Alginate Overproduction by Growth of Pseudomonas aeruginosa on PIAAMV

ORGANISM
Pseudomonas aeruginosa

SUMMARY
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic pathogen that can adapt to changing environments and can secrete an exopolysaccharide known as alginate as a protection response resulting in a colony morphology and phenotype referred to as mucoid.  However how P. aeruginosa senses its environment and activates alginate overproduction is not fully understood.  Previously, we showed that Pseudomonas isolation agar (PIA) supplemented with ammonium metavanadate (PIAAMV) induces P. aeruginosa to overproduce alginate.  Vanadate is a phosphate mimic and causes protein misfolding by disruption of disulfide bonds.  Here we used PIAAMV to characterize the pathways involved in inducible alginate production and tested the global effects of P. aeruginosa growth on PIAAMV by a mutant library screen, transcriptomics, and in a murine acute virulence model.  The PA14 non-redundant mutant library was screened on PIAAMV to identify new genes that are required for the inducible alginate stress response.  A functionally diverse set of genes encoding products involved in cell envelope biogenesis, peptidoglycan, uptake of phosphate and iron, phenazines biosynthesis, and other processes were identified as positive regulators of the mucoid phenotype on PIAAMV.  Transcriptome analysis of P. aeruginosa growing in the presence of vanadate caused differential expression of genes involved in virulence, envelope biogenesis, and cell stress pathways.  In this study, it was observed that growth on PIAAMV attenuates P. aeruginosa in a mouse pneumonia model.  Induction of alginate overproduction occurs as a stress response to protect P. aeruginosa but it may be possible to modulate and inhibit these pathways based on the new genes identified in this study.

DESIGN
Strain PAO1 was cultured on both PIA and PIAAMV for 18 hr.  Three separate plates were used for each media.  The cells from each plate were scraped into 4 ml of RNA Protect (Qiagen) and stored immediately at -80°C.    Cells were treated with RNAprotect (Qiagen) and total RNA was extracted using an RNeasy mini purification kit (Qiagen) per the manufacturer’s instructions.  RNA quality and the presence of residual DNA were checked on an Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 electrophoretic system pre- and post-DNase treatment.  Ten micrograms of total RNA was used for cDNA synthesis, fragmentation, and labeling according to the Affymetrix GeneChip P. aeruginosa genome array expression analysis protocol. RNA isolation, cDNA preparation, labeling and microarray analysis were performed as previously described in reference: Damron, F. H., J. P. Owings, Y. Okkotsu, J. J. Varga, J. R. Schurr, J. B. Goldberg, M. J. Schurr, and H. D. Yu. 2012. Analysis of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa Regulon Controlled by the Sensor Kinase KinB and Sigma Factor RpoN. J Bacteriol 194:1317-30.

PLATFORM
GPL84 [Pae_G1a] Affymetrix Pseudomonas aeruginosa Array

CITATIONS
23794622

