TITLE
Gene expression signatures of C-terminal shorter RUNX1 protein hematopoietic models

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
RUNX1 gene chromosomal translocations and mutations are frequent in acute myeloid leukaemia, sometimes resulting in the aberrant expression of C-terminal-truncated RUNX1 proteins lacking the transactivation domain (TAD). Some AML patients anomalously over-express a RUNX1a splice variant with the same TAD deficit. We performed an in-depth in vitro study of the role of TAD-defective RUNX1 proteins in AML development in human hematopoietic/progenitor stem cells. Transformation ability, maturation phenotype and differentiation/proliferation effects were assessed. Short RUNX1 protein expression seemed to increase both proliferation and self-renewal capacity, disrupting the differentiation program and interfering with wild-type RUNX1b protein, in a dominant-negative, dose-dependent manner. Expression microarray analysis showed short RUNX1 and RUNX1/ETO models had similar aberrant expression patterns. Genes known to be broadly involved in self-renewal and leukemogenesis were found to be altered; specifically observed were overexpression of homeobox genes, downregulation of primitive erythroid genes and alterations in leukemogenic transcription factors. The Wnt/b-catenin and RhoA pathways were also observed to be altered, whereas short RUNX1 proteins appeared not to affect the Notch1 pathway, which is altered in the RUNX1/ETO model. Therefore, we propose that TAD-defective RUNX1 proteins may contribute to leukemogenesis and could form the basis of a new genetic category of AML.

DESIGN
Comparative experiment: Human CD34+ hematopoietic cells gene expression was measured after TAD defective RUNX1 cDNA transfection vs empty vector transfection. Two independent experiments were performed for each protein model, using different cord blood donors for each experiment.

PLATFORM
GPL14550 Agilent-028004 SurePrint G3 Human GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name Version)

CITATIONS
25798834

