TITLE
Molecular targets of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) within the zebrafish ovary

ORGANISM
Danio rerio

SUMMARY
2,3,7,8-TCDD (TCDD) is a reproductive toxicant and endocrine disruptor in nearly all vertebrates, yet the mechanisms by which TCDD induces these reproductive alterations have not been fully characterized.  Fish are among the most sensitive vertebrates to the toxic effects of TCDD, and even subtle physiologic changes induced by TCDD can impair reproduction. Previously, we have shown that chronic, sub-lethal exposure to TCDD decreased reproductive capacity, reduced serum estradiol and vitellogenin concentrations, and altered follicular development. Here we investigate the transcriptional changes in zebrafish ovary as they relate to observed attenuated estradiol concentrations and ovarian development.  We used quantitative RT-PCR to assess TCDD’s effects on the expression of several candidate genes important in the regulation of follicular development and steroidogenesis. Additionally, global changes in gene expression in the ovary caused by TCDD exposure were identified using Affymetrix Gene Chip Analysis.  Our data suggest that TCDD may inhibit follicle maturation via attenuated gonadotropin responsiveness and/or depressed estradiol biosynthesis. Additionally, genes involved in glucose and lipid metabolism, regulation of transcription, and immune function were dysregulated by at least 2-fold suggesting that TCDD alters various integrated networks of signaling pathways.  Approximately 89% of dysregulated transcripts contain putative AHR response elements (AHRE) within 5kb upstream of the predicted transcriptional start site suggesting ovarian toxicity is AHRE driven.  Furthermore, approximately 49% of dysregulated transcripts contain putative estrogen response elements (ERE) suggesting that dysregulation of estrogen-responsive genes may also contribute to TCDD-induced attenuated follicular development.  Patterns in gene expression were correlated with putative EREs and AHREs, and suggest that impacts on the regulation of transcription may play a large role in TCDD’s ovarian toxicity.  Taken together, these data illustrate the complexity of TCDD’s ovarian toxicity. Keywords: dose response

DESIGN
A total of eight samples were analyzed including three TCDD doses (10, 40, 100 ppb, dietary exposure) and vehicle control samples. cRNA targets were synthesized from pooled total RNA isolated from five ovaries from different individuals in each treatment group. Each individual contributed equally to a given pool. Two technical replicates were run for each treatment group. Several genes of interest arising from this microarray study were validated by Quantitative RT-PCR with individual ovary samples to assess biological variability.

PLATFORM
GPL1319 [Zebrafish] Affymetrix Zebrafish Genome Array

CITATIONS
17884332

