TITLE
Nogo-B protects mice against lipopolysaccharide-induced acute lung injury

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Purpose: Acute lung injury (ALI) is a severe clinical disorder characterized by diffused capillary-alveolar barrier damage and noncardiogenic lung edema induced by excessive inflammation reactions. Nogo-B, a member of the reticulon 4 protein family, plays a critical role in modulating macrophages and neutrophils’ function in inflammation. Its role in ALI remains unclear.   Methods: Pulmonary expression of Nogo-B was investigated in a LPS-induced ALI mice model. The effects and the underline mechanisms of Nogo-B expression on the severity of lung injury was assessed using histological examination, Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) protein and inflammatory cells and cytokines measurement, and microarray analysis.   Results: Nogo-B was normally highly expressed in the lungs of naïve C57BL/6 mice. Intra-tracheal instillation of LPS significantly repressed the Nogo-B expression in lung tissues and BALF cells of ALI mice. In addition, over-expression of pulmonary Nogo-B using an adenovirus vector which expresses a Nogo-B-RFP-3-flag fusion protein (Ad-Nogo-B) significantly prolonged the survival time of mice challenged with lethal dose of LPS. Histological results and BALF protein measurement convinced that Ad-Nogo-B treated mice had less severity of lung injury and alveolar protein exudation, as compared with control adenovirus treated mice (Ad-RFP). They also had higher MCP-1 secretion and alveolar macrophages infiltration, but lower neutrophils infiltration. Finally, using microarray analysis, we identified a protective gene, PTX3, was highly elevated in Ad-Nogo-B treated mice.   Conclusions: Nogo-B played a protective role in LPS-induced ALI, which might exert its role through modulation of inflammatory response and PTX3 secretion.

DESIGN
A total of 12 samples from mice treated with or without LPS in the presence of Ad-Nogo-B or Ad-RFP transfection (n=3 for each group)

