TITLE
High-throughput sequencing reveals differential expression of miRNAs in intestine from sea cucumber during aestivation [microarray]

ORGANISM
Apostichopus japonicus

SUMMARY
The regulatory role of miRNA in gene expression is an emerging hot new topic in the control of hypometabolism. Sea cucumber aestivation is a complicated physiological process that includes obvious hypometabolism as evidenced by a decrease in the rates of oxygen consumption and ammonia nitrogen excretion, as well as a serious degeneration of the intestine into a very tiny filament. To determine whether miRNAs play an important regulatory roles in this process, the present study analyzed profiles of miRNA expression in the intestine of sea cucumber (Apostichopus japonicus), using Solexa deep sequencing technology. We identified 309 sea cucumber miRNAs, including 19 novel miRNAs specific to sea cucumber. Animals sampled during deep aestivation (DA) after at least 15 days of continuous torpor, were compared with animals from a non-aestivation (NA) state (animals that had passed through aestivation and returned to an active state). We identified 42 differentially expressed miRNAs (RPM (reads per million) > 10, |FC| (|fold change|) ≥1, FDR < 0.01) during aestivation, which were validated by two other miRNA profiling methods: miRNA microarray and real-time PCR. Among the most prominent miRNA species, miR-200-3p, miR-2004, miR-2010, miR-22, miR-252a, miR-252a-3p and miR-92 were significantly over-expressed during deep aestivation compared with non-aestivation animals. Preliminary analyses of their putative target genes suggest that these miRNAs could play important roles in global transcriptional depression during aestivation.

DESIGN
In the present study,we present for the first time, using Solexa sequencing technology, an analysis of the global profile of small RNAs in non-aestivation (NA) and deep aestivation (DA) sea cucumbers. We focus on intestine in the present study because it is the major site responsible for the strong metabolic rate depression seen under deep aestivating conditions and the global expression profile of mRNA from the this organ has also been constructed applying RNA-seq technology in our previous study (Zhao and Chen, unpublished data). A preliminary analysis of the functional relevance of miRNA expression in relation to hypometabolism during aestivation is presented. A miRNA microarray and RT-qPCR were both used to supplement and confirm differentially expressed miRNAs. Our findings provide important new insights into the molecular mechanisms of sea cucumber aestivation.

