TITLE
Blood expression profiles of fragile X premutation carriers identify genes involved in neurodegenerative and infertility phenotypes [SHSY5Y]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Fragile X premutation carriers (fXPC) of the CGG expansion in the 5’-UTR of the fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene are at high risk of Fragile X Tremor/Ataxia Syndrome (FXTAS), and females might undergo Premature Ovarian Failure (POF1). We have evaluated the peripheral blood gene expression profiles of fXPC and detected a strong deregulation of genes enriched in FXTAS-relevant biological pathways, including inflammation, and neuronal homeostasis and survival. More than 30% of differentially expressed correspond to long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs). Several deregulated genes (CASP3, DFFA, APP, AKT1, COX6C, COX7B, SOD1, RNF10, HDAC5, ATXN7, ATXN3 and EAP1) were validated in brain samples of a mouse model of FXTAS and in neuronal cells expressing the expanded FMR1 5’-UTR. One of the validated genes is the early at menopause 1 (EAP1) gene. We confirmed the EAP1 deregulation both in male and female fXPC. Down-regulation was stronger in female fXPC with POF1 compared with female fXPC without POF1. Increased levels of FMR1 mRNA were detected in all brain areas of the CGG-KI mouse model. EAP1 was significantly downregulated in the brainstem and cerebellum of the KI mouse, suggesting that EAP1 levels in certain brain areas could contribute to POF in this model. All together, these results suggest that gene expression profiling in blood of fXPC reflects changes in the brain transcriptome that may underlie neuropathological aspects in FXTAS and of POF.

DESIGN
In the study presented here, we have 6 biological replicats for the Mock conditions, 6 biological replicates for the expression of the wild type FMR1 5'UTR,  6 biological replicates for the expression of the mutant FMR1 5'UTR and 6 biological replicates for the overexpression of the muatnt FMR1 5'UTR.

PLATFORM
GPL16699 Agilent-039494 SurePrint G3 Human GE v2 8x60K Microarray 039381 (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

