TITLE
MicroRNAs Implicated in Dysregulation of Gene Expression Following Human Lung Transplantation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Lung transplantation remains the only viable treatment option for the majority of patients with advanced lung diseases. However, 5-year post-transplant survival rates remain low primarily secondary to chronic rejection.  Novel insights from global gene expression profiles may provide molecular phenotypes and therapeutic targets to improve outcomes after lung transplantation. We compared whole-genome transcriptional expression profiled using the Affymetrix Human Exon Array in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in lung transplant patients and normal individuals. 364 dysregulated genes in Caucasian lung transplant patients relative to normal individuals. Enriched Gene Ontology biological processes and pathways included defense response, immune response” and response to wounding”. We then compared the expression profiles of potential regulating miRNAs which suggested that dysregulation of a number of lung transplant-associated genes (e.g., ATR, FUT8, LRRC8B, NFKBIA) may be attributed to the differential expression of their regulating miRNAs. This exploratory analysis of the relationship between these miRNAs and their gene targets in the context of lung transplantation warrants further investigation and may serve as novel therapeutic targets in lung transplant complications.

DESIGN
PBMC samples were collected from 18 patients (14 Caucasian Americans and 4 African Americans) who underwent single-lung transplant or bilateral single-lung transplant surgery during 2005-2008. Control samples were collected from healthy individuals (27 Caucasians and 8 African Americans). Whole-genome expression profiles were performed using the Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0ST Array. The expression levels of miRNAs were profiled using the Exiqon miRCURY™0.  *This represents the Affymetrix Human Exon component of the study only.

PLATFORM
GPL5175 [HuEx-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

