TITLE
Autophagy regulator DRAM1 functions downstream of MYD88 in defense against tuberculosis (array)

ORGANISM
Danio rerio

SUMMARY
MyD88 is an adaptor protein in Toll-like receptor and interleukin 1 receptor mediated signaling pathways that plays an essential role in activation of immune responses following pathogen recognition. We investigate that role in the zebrafish embryo model by using a zebrafish mutant line that contains a premature stop condon in the gene encoding MyD88, leading to a truncated protein that lacks domains important for its normal function. We infected these MyD88 mutants and wildtype individuals with S Mycobacterium marinum to compare the resulting immune response by transcriptome profiling on total RNA isolated from single embryos. Autophagy regulator dram1 was identified as one of the MyD88-dependent genes.

DESIGN
This microarray study was designed to determine the effect of a truncation of the MyD88 protein on the innate immune response of zebrafish embryos during infection with Mycobacterium marinum. Embryos used in this study are derived from an incross between parents heterozygous for the mutation. Both homozygous mutants and their wildtype siblings were selected by genotyping after being injected with the bacteria or PBS as control. RNA was isolated from single embryos at 4 days post infection (4 dpi) and each treatment group consisted of three embryos: (1) Homozygous mutants mock-injected with PBS/2%PVP 4 dpi, (2) wildtype siblings mock-injected with PBS/2%PVP 4dpi, (3) M. marinum-infected homozygous mutants 4dpi, (4) M. marinum-infected wildtype siblings 4dpi. Embryos were grown at 28.5–30°C in egg water and manually dechorionated at 24 hours post fertilization (hpf). Subsequently, embryos were infected at 28 hpf by micro-injecting 200 colony forming units (CFU) of Mycobacterium marinum Mma20 bacteria into the caudal vein, or were mock-injected with buffer (PBS/2%PVP) as a control.  After injections embryos were transferred into fresh egg water and incubated for 4 days at 28°C. After the incubation period, single embryos were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and RNA was isolated for microarray analysis. The treatment groups were analyzed using a common reference approach.

PLATFORM
GPL15180 Agilent-028233 Danio rerio Leiden custom 180k array

CITATIONS
24922577

