TITLE
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibition attenuates insterstitial injury in a murine model of chronic glomerulonephritis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Evolution of glomerulonephritis (GN) to tubulointerstitial disease is a universal antecedent to the development of chronic kidney disease (CKD).  There is also evidence that angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibition may attenuate the development of CKD in some forms of glomerulonephritis.  We tested the role of ACE inhibition in a model of GN in which complement-dependent tubulointerstitial disease develops. GN was induced in C57BL/6 mice with intraperitoneal injections of horse spleen apoferritin (HSA) using lipopolysaccharide (LPS) as an adjuvant.  Four groups of six animals were studied:  saline-injected control mice treated with captopril or water, and GN mice treated with captopril or water. GN developed in all HSA-treated animals.  In those receiving captopril, however, proteinuria (albumin/creatinine ratio) was significantly reduced by captopril treatment.  Array screening was used to examined the expression of collagen-related genes and determine if these effects could be mediated by regulation of collagen genes.  Six genes were identified for further analysis by quantitative RT-PCR.  This model demonstrates that tubulointerstitial disease can be attenuated by ACE inhibition, with clinical, histologic, and gene expression measures.

DESIGN
All protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at SUNY Upstate Medical University. We employed four groups of six mice each:  saline-injected control mice with and without captopril, and GN with and without captopril.  C57BL/6 mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME).  Glomerulonephritis (GN) was induced by intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of 10 mg of apoferritin from horse spleen (HSA, Sigma, St. Louis, MO) five days per week, with i.p. injection of 100 micrograms lipopolysaccharide (LPS, from Salmonella minnesota; EMD Biosciences, La Jolla, CA), as adjuvant, three times per week.  Control animals received equal volumes of 0.15 M NaCl by i.p. injection.  Injections were begun when the mice were approximately eight weeks of age and were continued for six weeks.  Captopril, at 100 mg/kg/day was given in the drinking water.  After 9 weeks, the animals were euthanized and kidneys were removed for RNA purification and analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL8321 [Mouse430A_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430A 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

