TITLE
GATA2 as a potential prostate cancer metastasis-driving gene

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Metastatic prostate cancer (PCa) is a terminal disease and establishment of novel therapeutic strategy specifically targeting metastasis is critically required for its management. This study was aimed at identifying metastasis-driving genes which could potentially be therapeutic targets for metastatic prostate cancer. Integrative analysis of gene expression profiles from a pair of metastatic and non-metastatic prostate cancer tissue xenografts was used to identify potential prostate cancer metastasis-driving genes. Among the candidate genes found, GATA2, a master regulator gene in the development of hematopoietic system, was particularly interesting since it is an important pioneer factor in the regulation of AR-target gene in prostate cancer. In consistent with our finding, elevated expression of the GATA2 gene in metastatic prostate cancers was found and its expression was significantly correlated with poor prognosis in prostate cancer patients. Furthermore, indication of the GATA2 gene maybe the metastasis-driving gene was evidenced in decreased of cell migration, tissue invasion and focal adhesion disassembly in GATA2-down-regulated LNCaP cells. Global gene expression analysis after silencing of the GATA2 gene revealed a significant changed in cell transcriptomes with ~ 2500 genes with > 2 fold mRNA level changed and FDR < 0.05, indicates that GATA2 plays a critical role in cell reprogramming as pioneer factor in the development of prostate cancer metastasis.

DESIGN
LNCaP human prostate cancer cells transiently knockdown with siRNA that specifically targeting GATA2 (siGATA2) or scrambled siRNA (sicontrol). RNAs were isolated from cells after 72 hours of incubation. Gene expression profiles of four biological replicates from each sample group were analyzed to identify differentially regulated downstream genes after knockdown of GATA2.

PLATFORM
GPL14550 Agilent-028004 SurePrint G3 Human GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name Version)

CITATIONS
24448395

