TITLE
Transcriptomic analysis of human skin Langerhans cell and dermal dendritic cells stimulated in vitro with TNF-alpha and TSLP

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Langerhans cells (LCs) are antigen presenting cells residing in the epidermis. Due to the difficulties with obtaining sufficient quantities of LCs for functional studies, many controversies exist about their origin and function. To gain insights into the molecular mechanisms underpinning LC biology and to elucidate how similar they are to a classical tissue resident DCs of myeloid origin, we undertook a whole transcriptome analysis of human skin migratory CD1a+ LCs and CD11c+ DDCs, stimulated with an epidermal pro-inflammatory cytokine, TNF-α and TSLP over a time course of 24h. RNA was extracted from 250,000 human skin migratory CD1a+ LCs and CD11c+ DDCs stimulated in culture with 25ng/ml of TNF-α or 15ng/ml TSLP for 0, 2, 8 and 24h. RNA concentration and integrity was determined with an Agilent Bioanalyser (RIN of 7.0 or above) and gene expression analysis was carried out using the Human Genome U-219 Affymetrix platform by ARK-Genomics Centre, The Roslin Institute, Edinburgh. Expression data were normalised using the Robust Multichip Average (RMA) package. 2,334 transcripts regulated by exposure of skin DCs to TNF-α were identified with Bayesian Estimation of Temporal Regulation, a cut-off threshold 0.05 , for genes showing ≥ 1.5 fold difference between the maximum gene expression level and time 0 control in log2(x) RMA normalised gene expression.  The interactive 3D diagram presenting the transcriptomic networks in human skin DCs can be viewed at: The model of IRF-GRN can be vieved at :

DESIGN
RNA was extracted from 250,000 human skin migratory CD1a+ LCs and DDCs stimulated in culture with 25ng/ml of TNF-α 15ng/ml TSLP for 0, 2, 8 and 24h. RNA concentration and integrity was determined with an Agilent Bioanalyser (RIN of 7.0 or above) and gene expression analysis was carried out using the Human Genome U-219 Affymetrix platform by ARK-Genomics Centre, The Roslin Institute, Edinburgh. Expression data were normalised using the Robust Multichip Average (RMA) package. 2,334 transcripts regulated by exposure of skin DCs to TNF-α were identified with Bayesian Estimation of Temporal Regulation, a cut-off threshold 0.05 , for genes showing ≥ 1.5 fold difference between the maximum gene expression level and time 0 control in log2(x) RMA normalised gene expression. *submitter cannot locate the CEL files

