TITLE
Chromosome conformation capture-on-chip of dexamethasone synchronized cells at several circadian times

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The spatial organization of genes in the interphase nucleus plays an important role in establishment and regulation of gene expression. The circadian expressed and clock controlled genes represent about 10% of the transcripts in the mammalian cells, however the role of genome topology in the expression of genes in a circadian manner remains to be elucidated. In this study we investigated the characteristics and dynamics of the genomic loci that contact the clock controlled gene Dbp during the circadian cycle. To do so, we combined genome-wide interaction profiling by chromosome conformation capture-on-chip (4C) technology with analyses of circadian gene expression in synchronized mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). This approach allowed us to elucidate the three-dimensional organization of the genome during the circadian cycle around the clock controlled gene Dbp, paralleling its circadian expression. We found that the Dbp genomic environment remains largely similar during the circadian cycle. However, specific DNA regions change their frequency of interaction with Dbp as the circadian cycle progresses, delineating a Dbp circadian interactome. These specific changes are not present in Bmal1-/- MEF, suggesting that the clock machinery is implicated in shaping the genomic landscape around the Dbp locus. The Dbp interactome is enriched in DNA elements related to the clock system (E boxes). We found a spatial clustering of functionally related genes. The Dbp circadian interactome contains a subset of circadian genes whose expression closely parallels that for Dbp. Taken together, our results indicate that the Dbp subnuclear environment is organized to privilege the clock directed gene expression program.

DESIGN
Wild type mouse embryonic fibroblasts at the circadian times (CT) 22, 26, 30, 34 and 46. Bmal1-/- mouse embrionic fibroblasts at CT 22 and CT 34 Biological replicate using an independent line of wild type mouse embrionic fibroblast at CT 22 and CT 34 This submission represents the chromosome conformation capture-on-chip component of the overall study

PLATFORM
GPL13119 NimbleGen 2006-06-16_mouse36_deLaat tiling array

CITATIONS
24056944

