TITLE
Global gene expression profiles of synoviocytes and macrophages in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Rheumatoid synoviocytes, which consist of fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) and synovial macrophages (SM), are crucial for the progression of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Particularly, FLS of RA patients (RA-FLS) exhibit invasive characteristics reminiscent of cancer cells, destroying cartilage and bone, although it remains unresolved how RA-FLS exhibit invasive phenotype. RA-FLS and SM originate differently from mesenchymal and myeloid cells, respectively, but share many pathologic functions. However, the molecular signatures and biological networks representing the distinct and shared features of the two cell types are unknown. Presently, we performed global transcriptome profiling of FLS and SM obtained from RA and osteoarthritis patients. By comparing the transcriptomes, we identified distinct molecular signatures and cellular processes defining invasiveness of RA-FLS and pro-inflammatory properties of RA synovial macrophages (RA-SM), respectively. Interestingly, under interleukin1β-stimulated condition, RA-FLS newly acquired pro-inflammatory signature mimicking RA-SM without losing invasive properties. We next reconstructed a network model that delineates the shared, RA-FLS-dominant (invasive), and RA-SM-dominant (inflammatory) processes. From the network model, we selected 13 genes, including POSTN and TWIST1, as novel regulator candidates responsible for FLS invasiveness. Of note, POSTN and TWIST1 expressions were elevated in independent RA-FLS and were further instigated by interleukin1β. In vitro functional assays demonstrated the requirement of POSTN and TWIST1 for migration and invasion of RA-FLS stimulated with interleukin1β. Taken together, our systems approach to rheumatoid synovitis provides a basis for identifying novel regulators responsible for pathological features of RA-FLS and RA-SM, demonstrating how a certain type of cells acquires functional redundancy under chronic inflammatory conditions.

DESIGN
To identify molecular signatures of FLS and MLS in RA joints, we isolated FLS from synovial tissues of RA and osteoarthritis (OA) patients, obtained synovial macrophages from synovial fluid of RA patients, and differentiated control macrophages from peripheral blood of healthy subjects. Also, we stimulated FLS with IL1β, and then analyzed gene expression profiles of both IL1β-stimulated RA-FLS and OA-FLS

PLATFORM
GPL8432 Illumina HumanRef-8 WG-DASL v3.0 GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
24374632

