TITLE
Hippocampal Gene Expression in Young and Adult Mice with Memory Deficits

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The purpose of this study was to determine whether there were differences in gene expression in the hippocampus, a part of the brain involved in memory consolidation, between male mice with age-related memory deficits (SAMP8 mice) and control mice with no age-related memory deficits.  The senescence-accelerated mouse (SAMP8) strain exhibits decreased learning and memory and increased amyloid beta peptide (Aβ) accumulation at 12 months compared to 4 months.  To detect differences in gene expression in SAMP8 mice, we used a Control mouse that was a 50% cross between SAMP8 and CD-1 mice and which showed no memory deficits  (50% SAMP8 mouse).  We then compared gene expression in the hippocampus of 4 month and 12 month old SAMP8 and Control mice using Affymetrix gene arrays.  At 12 months, but not at 4 months, pathway analysis revealed significant differences in the Long Term Potentiation (LTP) (6 genes), Phosphatidylinositol Signaling (6 genes), and Endocytosis (10 genes) pathways.  The changes in LTP included MAPK signaling (N-ras, CREB binding protein, protein phosphatase inhibitor 1) and Ca-dependent signaling (PI receptors 1 and 2 and phospholipase C).  Changes in phosphatidylinositol signaling genes suggested altered signaling through PI3-kinase, and Western blotting revealed phosphorylation changes in AKT and 70S6K.  Changes in the Endocytosis pathway involved genes related to clathrin-mediated endocytosis (dynamin and clathrin).  Endocytosis is required for receptor recycling, is involved in Aβ metabolism, and is regulated by phosphatidylinositol signaling.  In summary, these studies demonstrate altered genes expression in three SAMP8 hippocampal pathways associated with memory formation and consolidation.  These pathways may provide new therapeutic targets in addition to targeting Aβ metabolism itself. Global differential profiling of hippocampal gene expression (4 month and 12 month old SAMP8 and Control mice) was performed using Affymetrix GeneChip® Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Arrays.  At 12 months, but not at 4 months, pathway analysis revealed significant differences in the Long Term Potentiation (LTP) (6 genes), Phosphatidylinositol Signaling (6 genes), and Endocytosis (10 genes) pathways.  The changes in LTP included MAPK signaling (N-ras, CREB binding protein, protein phosphatase inhibitor 1) and Ca-dependent signaling (PI receptors 1 and 2 and phospholipase C).  Changes in phosphatidylinositol signaling genes suggested altered signaling through PI3-kinase, and Western blotting revealed phosphorylation changes in AKT and 70S6K.  Changes in the Endocytosis pathway involved genes related to clathrin-mediated endocytosis (dynamin and clathrin).  Endocytosis is required for receptor recycling, is involved in Aβ metabolism, and is regulated by phosphatidylinositol signaling.  In summary, these studies demonstrate altered genes expression in three SAMP8 hippocampal pathways associated with memory formation and consolidation.  These pathways may provide new therapeutic targets in addition to targeting Aβ metabolism itself.

DESIGN
2-way ANOVA (2 x 2 conditions, n=4).  First variable was age (4 and 12 months) and second variable was mouse strain (Control and SAMP8).  This results in 4 groups: Control-4 month, Control-12 month, SAMP8-4 month, and SAMP8-12 month.   Each group had 4 biological replicates (4 mice).  The ”Control” mice were a 50% backcross of the SAMP8 mice with CD-1 mice (50% SAMP8 mice).  These mice were closely related to SAMP8 mice but exhibited no memory deficits at 4 or 12 months.  The SAMP8 mice had memory deficits at 12 months but not at 4 months.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

