TITLE
The gene expression profiling array of LncRNA between tumor tissues and paired non-tumor tissues in HBV-positive hapatocellular carcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Investigation of whole genome gene expression level changes of LncRNAs in tumor tissues and paired non-tumor tissues in HBV-positive hapatocellular carcinoma. The different expression genes were further analysised.

DESIGN
The human LncRNA microarray analysis of the 10 samples (5 non-tumor tissues and 5 paired tumor tissues) were completed. Total RNA from each sample was quantified using the NanoDrop ND-1000 and RNA integrity was assessed using standard denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis. Total RNA of each sample was used for labeling and array hybridization as the following steps: 1) Reverse transcription with by Invitrogen Superscript ds-cDNA synthesis kit; 2) ds-cDNA labeling with NimbleGen one-color DNA labeling kit; 3) Array hybridization using the NimbleGen Hybridization System and followed by washing with the NimbleGen wash buffer kit; 4) Array scanning using the Agilent Scanner G2505C.  Scanned images (TIFF format) were then imported into NimbleScan software (version 2.5) for grid alignment and expression data analysis. Expression data were normalized through quantile normalization and the Robust Multichip Average (RMA) algorithm included in the NimbleScan software. The Probe level (*_norm_RMA.pair) files and mRNA level (*_RMA.calls) files were generated after normalization. All mRNAs level files were imported into Agilent GeneSpring GX software (version 11.5.1) for further analysis.mRNAs that at least 3 out of 6 samples have values greater than or equal to lower cut-off: 50.0 (“All Targets Value”) were chosen for further data analysis. Differentially expressed mRNAs were identified through Volcano Plot filtering. Pathway analysis and GO analysis were applied to determine the roles of these differentially expressed mRNAs played in these biological pathways or GO terms. Finally, Hierarchical Clustering was performed to show the distinguishable mRNAs expression pattern among samples.

PLATFORM
GPL11269 Arraystar Human lncRNA array version 1

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

MICROARRAYP
T
