TITLE
SYNTHESIS OF THE INTERSPECIES SIGNALING MOLECULE AUTOINDUCER-2 PLAYS AN IMPORTANT ROLE IN THE ANTI-MICROBIAL EFFECT OF BIFIDOBACTERIA

ORGANISM
Bifidobacterium breve UCC2003

SUMMARY
In the present study we show that a functional luxS gene is present in all members of the genus Bifidobacterium and that AI-2 production by Bifidobacterium breve UCC2003 is necessary to confer protection against Salmonella infection in Caenorhabditis elegans. Mutants carrying a disrupted luxS gene conferred less protection than the WT, whereas administration of a complemented strain, a LuxS-overexpression strain and the WT resulted in similar survival. Transcriptome data obtained for both the WT and the luxS-insertion mutant grown in vitro suggest that LuxS has a metabolic role that impacts on iron metabolism. In line with this, we demonstrated that the luxS mutant is significantly more susceptible to the ferrous ion chelator 2,2-dipyridyl than the WT strain. Furthermore, qRT-PCR shows that the iron regulated genes are upregulated under  in vivo conditions, while we also show that LuxS is required for colonization of BALB/c mice. Altogether, our findings provide detailed insights into the molecular mechanism underlying gut pathogen protection conferred by bifidobacteria.

DESIGN
DNA-microarrays containing oligonucleotide primers representing each of the 1864 annotated genes on the genome of B. breve UCC2003  (O'Connell Motherway et al., 2011) were designed by and obtained from Agilent Technologies (Palo Alto, Ca., USA). Methods for cell disruption, RNA isolation, RNA quality control, complementary DNA synthesis and labeling were performed as described previously (Pokusaeva et al., 2009). Labeled cDNA was hybridized using the Agilent Gene Expression hybridization kit (part number 5188-5242) as described in the Agilent Two-Color Microarray-Based Gene Expression Analysis v4.0 manual (G4140-90050). Following hybridization, microarrays were washed in accordance with Agilent’s standard procedures and scanned using an Agilent DNA microarray scanner (model G2565A). Generated scans were converted to data files with Agilent's Feature Extraction software (Version 9.5). DNA-microarray data were processed as previously described (Garcia De La Nava et al., 2003). Differential expression tests were performed with the Cyber-T implementation of a variant of the t-test (Long et al., 2001). A gene was considered differentially expressed when p < 0.001 and an expression ratio of > 3 or < 0.33 relative to the control.

