TITLE
Antenatal maternal long-term hypoxia: acclimatization responses with altered gene expression in ovine fetal carotid arteries

ORGANISM
Ovis aries

SUMMARY
In humans and other species, Longlong-term hypoxia (LTH) during pregnancy can lead to intrauterine growth restriction with reduced body/brain weight, dysregulation of cerebral blood flow (CBF), and other problems in humans and rodents. In contrast, sheep appear to undergo relatively successful acclimatization, not demonstrating any of the above-mentioned problems except at extremely high altitude. To identify the signal transduction genetic pathways and those critical molecules, which may be involved in acclimatization to high altitude LTH, we conducted microarray with advanced bioinformatic analysis on carotid arteries (CA) from the normoxic near-term ovine fetus at sea-level and those acclimatized to high altitude for 110+ days during gestation. In response to LTH acclimatization, in fetal CA we identified, mRNA from 38 genes upregulated ( > 2 fFold; (P < 0.05) and 9 genes downregulated ( > 2-f Fold; (P < 0.05). The major genes with upregulated mRNA were SLC1A3, Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) binding protein 3, IGF type 2 receptor, transforming growth factor (TGF) Beta-3, and genes involved in the AKT and BCL2 signal transduction networks. The majority of genes with upregulated mRNA have a common motif for Pbx/Knotted homeobox in the promoter region, and Sox family binding sites in the 3’ un -translated region (UTR). Genes with downregulated mRNA included those involved in the P53 pathway and 5-lipoxygenase activating proteins. The promoter region of all genes with downregulated mRNA, had a common 49 bp region, with a binding site for DOT6 and TOD6, components of the RPD3 histone deacetylase complex RPD3C(L). We also identified miRNA complementary to a number of the altered genes. Thus, the present study identified molecules in the ovine fetus, which may help it to play a role in the acclimatizatione successfully response to high-altitude associated LTH.

DESIGN
In these series of experiments we examined changes in gene expression in sheep carotids. Pregnant sheep and non-pregnant adult sheep were exposed to 110 days of hypoxia at 3801 meters of altitude.   Carotid arteries from fetuses from non-pregnant adult from sea-level controls and those from high-altitude were compared by Agilent ovine custom array

