TITLE
Loss of Sip1 leads to migration defects and retention of ectodermal markers during lens development

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
We report the application of  RNA-sequencing technology for the high-throughput profiling of mammalian lens gene expression at embryonic day 15.5.  The lens has a particularly biased transcriptome, with the top 50 genes encoding approximately 90% of the protein content.  Using RNA-Seq, we have shown that there are over 7,700 genes being expressed in the lens at embryonic day 15.5.  As expected, the crystallins and many structural genes were amoung the most highly expressed; however, numerous genes expressed at lower transcript abundance were also identified.  This study provides a framework for the application of RNA-Seq technology towards characterization of the mammalian lens transcriptome during development. Using high-throughput RNA-sequencing, gene expression in the mammalian lens was compared between an inbred C56Bl/6 < har > strain and a mix background strain at E15.5.  This analysis identifies almost 2,000 genes being differentially expressed between the inbred and mixed background lenses, ranging from 6.5 fold upregulated to 5.2 fold downregulated in the mixed background compared to the inbred strain.  This list does not include unknown/predicted genes or pseudogenes which are known to change between strains.  Further, it appears that approximately 98% of these genes are altered at levels less than 2.5 fold.  This study therefore provides a fold change threshold cutoff (2.5 fold) to use in the analysis of differentially expressed lens genes at E15.5 using RNA-Seq technology as it takes into account genetic variation due to background strain differences. SIP1 encodes a DNA-binding transcription factor that regulates multiple developmental processes as highlighted by the pleiotropic defects observed in Mowat-Wilson Syndrome, which results from mutations in this gene.  Further, in adults, dysregulated SIP1 expression has been implicated in both cancer and fibrotic diseases where it functionally links TGFb signaling to the loss of epithelial preferred gene expression.  In the ocular lens, an epithelial tissue important for vision, Sip1 is co-expressed with epithelial markers such as E-cadherin, and is required for the complete separation of the lens vesicle from the head ectoderm during early ocular morphogenesis.  However, the function of Sip1 after early lens morphogenesis is still unknown.   Here, we conditionally deleted Sip1 from the developing mouse lens shortly after lens vesicle closure, leading to defects in coordinated fiber cell tip migration, defective suture formation and cataract.  Interestingly, RNA-Sequencing analysis on Sip1 knockout lenses identified 190 differentially expressed genes, all of which are distinct from previously described Sip1 target genes involved in EMT/cancer.  Furthermore, 34% of the upregulated genes in the Sip1 knockout lenses are normally downregulated as the lens transitions from the lens vesicle to early lens, while 49% of the genes downregulated in the Sip1 knockout lenses are normally upregulated during early lens development.  Overall, these data imply that Sip1 plays a major role in reprogramming the lens vesicle away from a surface ectoderm cell fate towards that necessary for the development of a transparent lens and demonstrate that Sip1 regulates distinctly different sets of genes in different cellular contexts.

DESIGN
RNA-Seq of inbred background wild type lenses at E15.5 RNA-Seq comparison of mixed background wild type controls and inbred wild type (C57Bl/6 < har > ) lenses at E15.5 RNA-Seq comparison of mixed background wild type controls and Sip1 conditional knockout lenses at E15.5

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
24161570

