TITLE
Applied Biosystems Human TaqMan Low Density Array (TLDA) in plasma samples from HCC cases and controls

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are abundant in the circulation and play a central role in diverse biological processes; they may be useful for early diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We conducted a two-phase, case-control study (20 pairs for the discovery set and 49 pairs for the validation set) to test the hypothesis that genome-wide dysregulation of circulating miRNAs differentiate HCC cases from controls. Taqman low density arrays were used to examine genome-wide miRNA expression for the discovery set, and quantitative RT-PCR was used to validate candidate miRNAs for both discovery and validation sets. Sixty-six miRNAs were found to be significantly over-expressed in plasma of HCC cases compared to controls after adjusting for false discovery rate (p < 0.05). A volcano plot indicated that 7 miRNAs had greater than 2-fold case-control differences with p < 0.01. Four significant miRNAs (miR-150, miR-30c, miR-483-5p and miR-520b) detectable in all samples with varied expression levels were further validated in a validation set. MiR-483-5p was statistically significantly over-expressed in HCC cases compared with controls (3.20 vs. 0.82, p < 0.0001). HCC risk factors and clinic-pathological characteristics did not influence miR-483-5p expression. The combination of plasma miR-483-5p level and HCV status can significantly differentiate HCC cases from controls with an AUC of 0.908 (p < 0.0001). The sensitivity and specificity were, respectively, 75.5% and 89.8%. These preliminary results suggest the importance of dysregulated circulating miR-483-5p as a potential HCC biomarker. Confirmation of aberrant expression of miR-483-5p in a large prospective HCC study will provide support for its application to HCC detection.

DESIGN
A hospital-based HCC case-control study including 20 HCC patients and 20 controls is conducted in Columbia University Medical Center (CUMC), which is approved by the Institutional Review Board. Cases were newly diagnosed HCC patients who were treated in the Hepatobiliary Oncology Clinics, CUMC, and examined pathologically. Controls were recruited from volunteers through the Research Recruitment and Minority Outreach (RRMO) core of Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center (HICCC). Flyers were placed at strategic locations around CUMC where hospital visitors and employees frequent or were handed out at inreach events at the hospital or at outreach events in the community. Interested participants were directed to contact the trained recruitment staff from the RRMO and given further information about participation. Interested participants were excluded from the control group if diagnosed for any kind of cancer or liver disease. Eligible controls were asked to fill out the same demographic and epidemiological questionnaire as HCC cases. In the current study, controls were matched with HCC cases on age (±5 yrs), gender (male/female) and ethnicities (Caucasian/Hispanic/African-American/Asian).

PLATFORM
GPL15497 Applied Biosystems TaqMan Array Human MicroRNA Cards (A+B Card Set v3)

CITATIONS
24127413

