TITLE
Effects of pregnancy on hepatic gene expression in CYP2D6-humanized mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Hepatic drug metabolism plays a key role in determining drug response and safety. Studies of drug metabolism generate valuable information about regulation of genes encoding drug-metabolizing enzymes and enzyme functions that are critical in developing dosing guideline. However, current knowledge is insufficient to support dosing guideline for pregnant women. Specifically, substrates of a major drug-metabolizing enzyme CYP2D6 show increased elimination during pregnancy, but the underlying mechanisms are completely unknown largely due to a lack of experimental models. Here, we introduce CYP2D6-humanized (Tg-CYP2D6) mice as an animal model where hepatic CYP2D6 expression is increased during pregnancy, recapitulating the clinically reported changes in CYP2D6-mediated drug metabolism. In these mice, pregnancy had minimal effects on the expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4a, the transcription factor controlling basal CYP2D6 expression. Krüppel-like factor (KLF) 9 and small heterodimer partner (SHP) were found up- and down-regulated in Tg-CYP2D6 mouse livers during pregnancy, respectively. KLF9 enhanced HNF4a-mediated transactivation of the CYP2D6 promoter whereas SHP repressed it. Retinoic acid (RA), an endogenous compound that induces SHP, exhibited decreased hepatic levels during pregnancy. These results indicate that interplay among hepatic transcription factors HNF4a, SHP, and KLF9 underlies CYP2D6 induction during pregnancy, and that retinoic acid is a potential trigger. This is the first report on the mechanisms underlying CYP2D6 induction and illustrates the utility of humanized mice as an in vivo model to study altered drug disposition during pregnancy.

DESIGN
Livers collected at pre-pregnancy, 21 days of pregnancy, and 7 days postpartum from CYP2D6-humanized mice.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
25217496

