TITLE
A profile of murine gastric epithelial cells:  Parietal, Zymogenic, Pit

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Continuous regeneration of digestive enzyme (zymogen) secreting chief cells is a normal aspect of stomach function that is disrupted in pre-cancerous lesions. Regulation of zymogenic cell (ZC) differentiation is poorly understood.  Here we profile Parietal, Pit, and Zymogenic cells for comparison and study. Keywords: Bhlhb8, Mist1, mucous neck cell, laser-capture microdissection, zymogenic, gastric cell differentiation

DESIGN
Samples were obtained through Laser-capture microdisection of gastric epithelium.  The three samples come from enrichments for Zymogenic Cells (ZC), Parietal Cells (PC), and Mucus Pit Cells (Pit). Individual parietal cells (visualized by DBA-positivity and autofluorescence) from well-oriented gastric units were dissected (PixCell II LCM apparatus, 7.5-µm spot diameter; CapSure HS LCM caps, Arcturus, Mountain View, CA) one-at-a-time from the pit zone and collected for GeneChips. Pit cells (E-cadherin-positive, DBA-negative) were then collected from the same gastric units. Only the pit cells in a 2-3-cell-thick region at the apex of the gastric unit – but not yet upon the gastric surface – were taken. ZCs (E-cadherin-positive, GSII/DBA-negative cells in the base zones) were collected from different slides in corpus gastric units after potentially contaminating basal parietal cells had first been dissected and discarded. 3000-5000 individual cells from each cell lineage were isolated from 4-5 individual mice, and RNA was purified by PicoPure kit (Arcturus). RNA integrity was verified, and RNAs for each lineage were pooled from multiple mice and multiple dissections to make 20 ng total RNA, which was then amplified, labeled, and fragmented (by the Arcturus RiboAmp HS kit followed by the RNA Amplification and Labeling Kit from Enzo Life Sciences). The resulting biotinylated cRNA probes were hybridized to Affymetrix (Santa Clara, CA) GeneChip® Mouse Genome 430 2.0 microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
17164426

