TITLE
Propagation of Human corneal Endothelial Cells – A Novel Dual Media Approach

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Human corneal endothelial cells (CECs) are not able to proliferate or regenerate within the eye. However, limited in vitro expansion of primary human CECs has been demonstrated by several laboratories, including ours. Due to the nature of these primary cells, various culture conditions supporting the active proliferation of these cells also drives them towards an endothelial-to-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) into fibroblastic-like cells. The occurrence of such a phenomenon has been observed as early as after the first round of passage. However, it should be noted that the degree of such transformation is highly heterogeneous, due likely to donor variability. In the current study, propagation of primary human CECs was carried out using a novel dual media approach, where M4 (F99: Ham’s F12/M199, 5% FBS, 20 μg/ml ascorbic acid, 1% ITS, 1% antibiotic/antimycotic and 10 ng/ml bFGF) was used to promote the proliferation of the CECs, and M5 (Endo: Human Endothelial-SFM, 5% FBS and 1% antibiotic/antimycotic), was used to stabilized these primary CECs when they reached 80% to 90% confluence.Primary cultures exposed to M5 were able to maintain the unique cellular structure of the human corneal endothelial cells and do not undergo EMT. In order to better understand the observed morphological changes at the molecular level following the switch from the proliferative M4 medium to the maintainance M5 medium, high throughput microarray analysis was performed on human CECs isolated from two donors and cultivated to the third passage. Subsequently, the global gene expression profile of the confluent human CECs expanded in M4 for the first (D17p) and second donor (D18p), were compared to the same set of the confluent human CECs maintained in M5 medium (D17m and D18m) for a further seven days.

DESIGN
Primary human CECs were expanded using the dual media approach to the third passage. Total RNA obtained from confluent P3 human CECs samples grown in the proliferative M4 medium (D17p and D18p) were compared to the same set of primary cultures that were exposed to M5 for a further 7 days (D17m and D18m).

PLATFORM
GPL10904 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip (gene symbol)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

