TITLE
IpsA, a novel transcriptional regulator required for inositol derived lipid formation in Corynebacteria and Mycobacteria

ORGANISM
Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC 13032

SUMMARY
The development of new drugs against tuberculosis and diphtheria is focused on disrupting the biogenesis of the cell wall, the unique architecture of which confers resistance against current therapies. The enzymatic pathways involved in the synthesis of the cell wall by these pathogens are well understood but the underlying regulatory mechanisms are largely unknown. Here, we characterize IpsA, a LacI-type transcriptional regulator conserved among Mycobacteria and Corynebacteria that plays a role in the regulation of cell wall biogenesis. IpsA triggers myo-inositol formation by activating ino1, which encodes inositol phosphate synthase. An IpsA deletion mutant of Corynebacterium glutamicum  cultured on glucose displayed significantly impaired growth and presented an elongated cell morphology. Analysis of the polar lipid fraction of the cell wall revealed the absence of inositol-derived lipids. The phenotype of the C. glutamicum ΔipsA mutant was complemented by homologues from Corynebacterium diphtheriae (dip1969) and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (rv3575), indicating the conserved function of IpsA in the pathogenic species. Additional targets of IpsA with putative functions in cell wall biogenesis were identified and IpsA was shown to bind to a conserved palindromic motif within the corresponding promoter regions. myo-inositol was identified as an effector of IpsA, causing the dissociation of the IpsA-DNA complex in vitro.  This characterization of IpsA function and of its regulon sheds light on the complex transcriptional control of cell wall biogenesis in the mycolata taxon and generates novel targets for drug development.

DESIGN
To identify genes which were regulated by IpsA (Cg2910), we performed DNA microarray analyses of ATCC 13032 ΔipsA against wild type. For this purpose RNA was isolated from cells cultivated in CGXII minimal medium with 2% glucose (w v-1) and harvested in the exponential growth phase at an OD600 of 1. Three biological replicates were performed.

PLATFORM
GPL16988 Agilent-040023 FZ_IBG1_4plex

CITATIONS
24377418

