TITLE
Cardiac mesenchymal progenitors from postmortem cardiac tissue retained cellular characterization

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background and Objective: Currently, the cells for transplantation were derived from either autologous or allogeneic tissue. The former has a drawback that the quality of donor cells could depend on the patient’s condition, and the quantity could also be limited. To solve these problems, we investigated the potential of allogeneic cardiac mesenchymal progenitors (CMPs) derived from postmortem heart, which might be an immunological privileged like bone marrow-derived mesenchymal progenitors. Materials and Methods: We examined whether viable CMPs could be isolated from murine postmortem cardiac tissue that was harvested 24 hours postmortem. After two to three weeks propagation with high dose of basic fibroblast growth factor, we performed the cellular characteristics analyses, which included proliferation and differentiation property flow cytometric analyses, and microarray analyses. Results: Postmortem CMPs had longer lag phase after seeding than CMPs from living tissues, but they demonstrated the similar characteristics in all above examinations. In addition, global gene expression analysis by microarray indicated the similar characteristics between the cell derived from postmortem and living tissue. Conclusion: These results indicate allogeneic postmortem CMPs could have promising potential for cell transplantation as clinical applications, because of circumventing the issue of brain death.

DESIGN
The samples were collected fom living or postmortem cardiac tissue (24 hr at 4C). We generated cardiac mesenchymal progenitors (CMPs) from these cardiac tissue, and compared global gene expression by AgilentMouse GE 8x60k Microarray. Adult, or fetal mouse heart RNAs were used as positive control. Adult mouse total heart RNAs were purchased from Clontech. Fetal mouse heart was extracted from fetus which is embryonic day 16.5 C57BL/6 strain. Tg means Transgenic mouse (C57BL/6-Tg(Myh6-EGFP)MG2).

PLATFORM
GPL10787 Agilent-028005 SurePrint G3 Mouse GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
24815158

