TITLE
zhang-affy-mouse-175010

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
In our original grant we proposed to use the NR3B-null mouse model to study the role of NR3B subunit in motor neuron function. We have now successfully generated NR3B null mice. Interestingly, NR3B-null mice invariably die at age P4-P8. Our preliminary examination indicates that the motor strength of these mice is severely impaired prior to death. As we continue to explore the cause of death in NR3B null mice, we propose to conduct gene profiling experiments to search for transcription changes in the brain related to ablation of the NR3B gene. We have previously used the UCLA array facility provided by the NINDS/NIMH Microarray Consortium to identify genes that show abnormal expression patterns in these mice using whole brain samples.  Now, we would like to use the same approach to analyze pure motor neuron samples obtained by Laser Capture Microdisection (LCM).  As these samples are of small size we need to use RNA amplification method.  We would like to compare probes from two amplification methods to see which one gives the best result. We will collect the cDNA probe obtained by RNA-based single primer isothermal amplification developed by Nugen, Inc. and the aRNA probe obtained from T7-based RNA amplification.  Both the hybridization intensity and the percentage of the present call of these two types of probe will be analyzed. The cDNA probe obtained by RNA-based single primer isothermal amplification developed by Nugen, Inc. may have some advantage over the aRNA probe obtained from T7-based RNA amplification. Two samples will be processed by either RNA-based single primer isothermal amplification developed by Nugen or T7-based RNA amplification to obtain cDNA or aRNA probes, respectively.  For each sample we will use 600 motor neurons obtained by LCM.   Both types of probe will be labeled by biotin and hybridize to Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array.  Data analysis will be performed by array facility. Keywords: dose response

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

