TITLE
Effects of THBS3, SPARC and SPP1 expression on biological behavior and survival in patients with osteosarcoma.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background Identification of the molecular determinants of invasion and metastatic potential may guide the development of a rational strategy for devising specific therapies that target the pathways leading to osteosarcoma. Methods In this study, we used pathway-focused GEarrays to screen for candidate genes related to tumor progression.  Expression patterns of the selected genes were validated by real time PCR on 61 osteosarcoma patient tumor samples and correlated with clinical and pathological data. Results THBS3, SPARC and SPP1 were identified with pathway-focused GEarrays as genes differentially expressed in osteosarcoma.  In particular, THBS3 was expressed at significantly high levels (p=0.0001) in biopsies from patients with metastasis at diagnosis, which is a predictor of worse overall survival, event-free survival and relapse free survival at diagnosis.  After chemotherapy, patients with tumors over-expressing THBS3 have worse relapse free survival. High SPARC expression was found in 51 of 55 (96.3%) osteosarcoma samples and correlated with the worst event-free survival (p=0.03) and relapse free survival (p=0.07).  Overexpression of SPP1 was found in 47 of 53 (89%) osteosarcomas correlating with better overall survival, event-free survival and relapse free survival at diagnosis. Conclusion With pathway-focused Gearrays, we identified three genes, which interestingly all encode for proteins involved in extracellular remodeling suggesting potential roles in osteosarcoma progression.  This is the first report on the THBS3 gene working as a stimulator of tumor progression.  Higher levels of THBS3 maintain the capacity of angiogenesis.  High levels of SPARC are not required for tumor progression but are necessary for tumor growth and maintenance.  SPP1 is not necessary for tumor progression in osteosarcoma and may be associated with inflammatory response and bone remodeling, functioning as a good biomarker. Keywords: disease state analysis using Superarray Pathway focused arrays

DESIGN
see paper: Cristiane Arruda Dalla-Torre et al. (2006). Effects of THBS3, SPARC and SPP1 expression on biological behavior and survival in patients with osteosarcoma. BMC Cancer.

PLATFORM
GPL1120 SuperArray GEArray Q Series Human Angiogenesis Gene Array GPL1133 SuperArray GEArray Q Series Human Tumor Metastasis Gene Array GPL3865 SuperArray GEArray Q Series Human Chemokines & Receptors cat. #HS-005.2

CITATIONS
17022822

