TITLE
Applied Biosystems Human TaqMan Low Density Array (TLDA) in plasma samples from EOC cases and controls

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Most (70%) epithelial ovarian cancers (EOCs) are diagnosed late. Non-invasive biomarkers that facilitate disease detection and predict outcome are needed. The microRNAs (miRNAs) represent a new class of biomarkers. This study was to identify and validate plasma miRNAs as biomarkers in EOC. We evaluated plasma samples of 360 EOC patients and 200 healthy controls from two institutions. All samples were grouped into screening, training and validation sets. We scanned the circulating plasma miRNAs by TaqMan low-density array in the screening set and identified/validated miRNA markers by real-time polymerase chain reaction assay in the training set. Receiver operating characteristic and logistic regression analyses established the diagnostic miRNA panel, which were confirmed in the validationsets. We found higher plasma miR-205 and lower let-7f expression in cases than in controls. MiR-205 and let-7f together provided high diagnostic accuracy for EOC, especially in patients with stage I disease. The combination of these two miRNAs and carbohydrate antigen-125 (CA-125) further improved the accuracy of detection. MiR-483-5p expression was elevated in stages III and IV compared with in stages I and II, which was consistent with its expression pattern in tumor tissues. Furthermore, lower levels of let-7f were predictive of poor prognosis in EOC patients. Our findings indicate that plasma miR-205 and let-7f are biomarkers for ovarian cancer detection that complement CA-125; let-7f may be predictive of ovarian cancer prognosis.

DESIGN
We designed a multi-stage, retrospective, nested case-control study to determine whether serum miRNA profiles can be used to predict EOC development. All samples were grouped into screening, training, and validation sets. A total of 560 plasma samples (360 cases and 200 controls) were obtained from Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital (TCIH) and Cancer Center of Nanjing Medical University. The cases and controls were well matched for age. The International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) staging system was used to stage cases. All patients and controls were genetically unrelated, ethnic Han Chinese women who were permanent residents of the urban area of Tianjin and Nanjing. Controls with cardiovascular, respiratory, digestive, urinary, reproductive, and endocrine diseases were excluded. The study protocols were approved by the Tianjin and Nanjing Center review committees. In screening set, to detect generalizable miRNA signatures, we pooled serum samples of 10 early-stage cases (stage I), 10 late-stage cases (stage IIIc-IV), and 10 healthy controls, respectively, and analyzed these three pool samples using a TaqMan low-density array (TLDA set 2.0, Applied Biosystems) chip screening in the discovery stage. In training set, the miRNAs identified in the screening set were validated using quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) on individual plasma samples of 76 EOC patients and 30 normal controls. In validation set, the validation set comprised a two-phase process. Promising associations from the screening and training set were evaluated in the validation phase I set, comprising 134 cases and 70 controls from Tianjin Center. The validation phase II set included samples of 77 EOC cases and 50 normal controls were from Tianjin Center and 73 EOC cases and 50 normal controls were from Nanjing Center.

PLATFORM
GPL16566 Applied Biosystems TaqMan Array Human microRNA A/B Cards v2.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

