TITLE
Slit2/Robo axis is mandatory for neural remodeling  in pancreatic cancer.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDA) is a critical health issue in cancer field with little new therapeutic options. Several evidences support an implication of intra-tumoral microenvironment (stroma) on PDA progression. However, its contribution to the role of neuroplastic changes within pathophysiology and clinical course of PDA, mainly through tumor recurrence and neuropathic pain, remains unknown neglecting a putative therapeutic window. Here, we report that intra-tumoral microenvironment is a mediator of PDA Associated Neural Remodeling (PANR). With laser capture microdissection of stromal/tumoral compartment from human PDA followed by cDNA based microarray analyses we highlighted numerous factors expressed by stromal compartment that could impact on neuroplastic changes; among them, the Slit2/Robo axon guidance pathway. Using co-culture in vitro, we showed that stromal secreted Slit2 increases DRG neurite outgrowth and Schwann cells migration/proliferation by modulating N-Cadherin/β-Catenin signaling. Importantly, Slit2/Robo signaling inhibition disrupts this stromal/neural connection. Finally, we revealed in vivo that Slit2 expression is correlated with neural remodeling within Human and mouse PDA. These results demonstrate the implication of microenvironment, through secretion of axon guidance molecule, in PANR. Furthermore, it provides rationale to investigate the disruption of stromal/neural compartment dialogue by using Slit2/Robo pathway inhibitors for treatment of pancreatic cancer recurrence and associated pain.

DESIGN
Freshly frozen tissue samples of PDACs were obtained from patients who underwent surgery. Patients underwent hemipancreaticoduodenectomy or distal pancreatectomy. No distant metastases were revealed at initial diagnosis. Histological examination confirmed diagnosis of PDAC in all cases. Prior to surgery all patients had signed an informed consent form that had been approved by the local ethics committee. Frozen sections were obtained from tissue samples of three tumors. After a brief staining sections were dehydrated and epithelial and stromal compartment has been microdissected using the PALM system. The microdissected material was immediately dissolute in a buffer containing β-mercaptoethanol and RNA carrier, and frozen before RNA extraction. Fifteen ug of total RNA was converted to biotinylated cRNA and hybridised to a human oligonucleotide array U133 Plus 2.0 (Genechip, Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA).

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
25590802

