TITLE
Airway epithelium, small airways, normal non-smokers, phenotypic normal smokers, smokers with COPD and early COPD

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Upregulation of Expression of the Ubiquitin Carboxyl Terminal Hydrolase L1 Gene in Human Airway Epithelium of Cigarette Smokers The microarray data deposited here is from 39 HG-U133 Plus 2.0 GeneChips, from 12 normal non-smokers, 12 phenotypic normal smokers, 9 Early COPD and 6 COPD individuals, all small airways, all small airway. A subset of these samples have been already submitted under GEO Accession Number GSE 4498. These are: 12 non-smokers samples (GSM101095-GSM101106) and 10 smoker samples (GSM101107-GSM101116). These 22 samples that are also in GSE4498 were described in Harvey, B-G; Heguy, A.; Leopold, P.L.; Carolan, B.; Ferris, B. and Crystal R.G. Modification of Gene Expression of the Small Airway Epithelium in Response to Cigarette Smoking. J. Mol. Med (in press). These data are part of a study aimed at  understanding how cigarette smoking modifies neuroendocrine cells, in which microarray analysis with TaqMan confirmation was used to assess airway epithelial samples obtained by fiberoptic bronchoscopy from 81 individuals (normal nonsmokers, normal smokers, smokers with early COPD and smokers with established COPD). Of 11 genes considered to be neuroendocrine cell-specific, only ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase L1(UCHL1), a member of the ubiquitin proteasome pathway, was consistently upregulated in smokers compared to nonsmokers. Up-regulation of UCHL1 at the protein level was observed with immunohistochemistry of bronchial biopsies of smokers compared to nonsmokers. Interestingly, however, while UCHL1 expression was present only in neuroendocrine cells of the airway epithelium in nonsmokers, UCHL1 expression was also expressed in ciliated epithelial cells in smokers, an intriguing observation in light of recent observations that ciliated cells can are capable of transdifferentiating to other airway epithelium. In the context that UCHL1 is involved in the degradation of unwanted, misfolded or damaged proteins within the cell and is overexpressed in > 50% of lung cancers, its overexpression in chronic smokers may represent an early event in the complex transformation from normal epithelium to overt malignancy. Keywords: non-smokers vs phenotypic normal smokers, smokers with early COPD, and smokers with COPD

DESIGN
comparison of gene expression in airway epithelial cells of the small airways of normal non-smokers, phenotypic normal smokers, smokers with early COPD and smokers with COPD

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
17108109 , 19106307

