TITLE
A genome-wide analysis of open chromatin in human epididymis epithelial cells reveals novel candidate regulatory elements for male infertility [Transcriptome data]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The epithelium lining the epididymis has a pivotal role in ensuring a luminal environment that can support normal sperm maturation. Many of the individual genes that encode proteins involved in establishing the epididymal luminal fluid are well characterized. They include ion channels, ion exchangers, transporters and solute carriers. However, the molecular mechanisms that coordinate expression of these genes and modulate their activities in response to biological stimuli are less well understood. To identify cis-regulatory elements for genes expressed in human epididymis epithelial cells we generated genome-wide maps of open chromatin by DNase-seq. This analysis identified 33,542 epididymis-selective DNase I hypersensitive sites (DHS), which were not evident in five cell types of different lineages. Identification of genes with epididymis-selective DHS at their promoters revealed gene pathways that are active in immature epididymis epithelial cells. These include processes correlating with epithelial function and also others with specific roles in the epididymis including retinol metabolism and ascorbate and aldarate metabolism. Peaks of epididymis-selective chromatin were seen in the androgen receptor gene and the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene, which has a critical role in regulating ion transport across the epididymis epithelium. In silico prediction of transcription factor binding sites that were over-represented in epididymis-selective DHS identified epithelial transcription factors including ELF5 and ELF3, the androgen receptor, Pax2 and Sox9, as components of epididymis transcriptional networks. Active genes, which are targets of each transcription factor, reveal important biological processes in the epididymis epithelium.

DESIGN
HEE cells were cultured as described previously (Harris and Coleman 1989). RNA was isolated by Trizol extraction from three primary cultures of HEE cells. Total RNA was purified by Millipore Microcon YM-100 filter centrifugation and shipped to MoGene, MO, for gene expression analysis on Nimblegen 4 x 72K HG18 60mer arrays. This submission represents transcriptome component of study.

PLATFORM
GPL8971 NimbleGen Homo sapiens HG18 60mer expr 4plex (4x72k)

CITATIONS
24006278

