TITLE
Gene expression profiles in individuals with asymptomatic infections against cognate household members with dengue fever

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Dengue represents one of the most serious life-threatening vector-borne infectious diseases that afflict ~50 million people across the globe annually. Whilst symptomatic infections are frequently reported, asymptomatic dengue largely remain unnoticed. The immune correlates conferring protection to individuals that remain clinically asymptomatic have seldom been investigated. We determined the gene expression profiles of host immune factors in individuals with asymptomatic infections, and whose cognate household members showed symptoms and signs consistent to clinical dengue infection. Results provide insight in association of certain host genes to protection against clinical dengue.

DESIGN
Blood samples were collected from Dengue Fever (DF) and Dengue Haemorrhagic Fever (DHF) patients in Malaysia who were admitted to university of Malaya Medical Centre (UMMC), Ampang Hospital (AmpangHospital), and Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah (HTAR) Klang. Blood from their asymptomatic household members were also collected. Their peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated. 29 sample pairs (SP) of dengue patients and their accompanying asymptomatic household members were chosen on the following basis for two-channel microarray experiments: patients who have shown positive results for DENV infection with at least 2 diagnostics tests indicating positivity. Positive results for the IgM-captured ELISA were P/N ratio more than 2.0, while total antibody titer of more than 1:2560 or 4 fold increase from acute to convalescence phase was considered positive in HI assay. PRNT, a neutralization test, was used as a measure for levels of neutralizing antibodies and was considered high when it was more than 1:640, based on a reduction neutralization of 50%.

PLATFORM
GPL17653 PIQOR (TM) Immunology Microarray, human antisense

CITATIONS
24727912

