TITLE
affy_brachy_2011_11-Transcriptomics analysis of DON and Fusarium graminearum response in Brachypodium distachyon

ORGANISM
Brachypodium distachyon

SUMMARY
affy_brachy_2011_11 - affy_brachy_2011_11 - Fusarium graminearum is the causal agent of Fusarium head blight (FHB) of small-grain cereals, including wheat. Besides direct grain losses, this disease is of major concern because of the production by the pathogen of mycotoxins which are hazardous to animals, thus making the grain unfit for food or feed. Major mycotoxins produced by the fungus are trichothecens, including deoxynivalenol (DON). In our laboratory, we use Brachypodium distachyon as a model plant for cereals because of its amenability (short life cycle, numerous genomic and genetic resources, ...). We have recently shown that F. graminearum does induce head blight symptoms on this species and that DON is produced on infected spikes. We have also evidenced that a F. graminearum strain unable to produce DON exhibits reduced virulence on B. distachyon spikes, as previously shown on wheat. The aim of this project is to analyse and compare the plant response to DON producing and non-producing strains of F. graminearum. This analysis will allow to decipher the mechanisms of detoxification set up by the plant and also more specific responses due to the impact of the mycotoxin on plant metabolism and physiology. -Three conditions on B. distachyon spikes: 1-Mock inoculation (Tween 20 0,01%) 2-Inoculation by a F. graminearum wild-type strain 3-Inoculation by a F. graminearum mutant strain, unable to produce DON Spikes were point inoculated with 3ul of either Tween 20 0.01%, wild-type strain or mutant strain (300 spores) and incubated for 96 hours. Six inoculated spikes were collected and pooled for each condition and biological replicate. Three independent biological replicates were conducted.

DESIGN
9 arrays - Brachypodium; normal vs disease comparison,time course

PLATFORM
GPL15863 [BradiAR1b520742] Custom Affymetrix Brachypodium GeneChip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

