TITLE
Foxp1 is a rate-limiting and essential negative regulator of Tfh cell differentiation

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
CD4+ T follicular helper (Tfh) cells are essential for germinal center (GC) and high-affinity antibody responses. Yet the regulation that determines the initial development of Tfh cells is still largely unknown. Here we find that transcription factor Foxp1, previously shown to be essential in maintaining T cell quiescence, is a rate-limiting and essential negative regulator of Tfh cell differentiation. Naïve CD4+ T cells constitutively express Foxp1A, and stimulation through the T cell receptor (TCR) transiently induces the expression of a shorter Foxp1D isoform. In T cell-dependent (TD) humoral responses, CD4+ T cells deficient in all Foxp1 isoforms preferentially differentiate into Tfh cells, resulting in substantially increased GC and antibody responses. This negative regulation of Foxp1 on Tfh cell differentiation shows profound dominance: even in the absence of B cells, Foxp1-deficient CD4+ T cells differentiate into Tfh cells with high frequencies and sustained Bcl6 expression. Further, in the absence of Foxp1, Tfh cells are generated in higher frequencies than seen with Bcl6 overexpression and Tfh cell differentiation becomes significantly resistant to Blimp1-mediated repression. Finally, our experiments reveal specific roles of Foxp1A and Foxp1D in inhibiting Tfh cell differentiation: TCR-induced Foxp1D functions as a ‘gatekeeper’ to block the initial Tfh cell development, and together Foxp1A and Foxp1D proteins inversely determine Tfh cell generation in a dosage-dependent manner. Our study suggests that two Foxp1 isoforms provide a “double check” mechanism as fundamental regulators in Tfh cell differentiation and humoral responses.

DESIGN
Gene expression analysis of ex vivo OT-II Foxp1-WT Tfh cells and OT-II Foxp-conditional knockout (CKO) Tfh cells 5 days after immunization.

PLATFORM
GPL6887 Illumina MouseWG-6 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
24859450

