TITLE
Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma cell lines (HTH83 and TL3) infected with LAMC2 shRNA

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Laminin-5 gamma-2 (LAMC2) is highly expressed in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma and associated with tumor progression, migration and invasion by modulating signaling of EGFR LAMC2 was highly expressed in ATC samples and cell lines compared to normal thyroid tissues. Silencing LAMC2 by shRNA in ATC cells moderately inhibited cell growth in liquid culture and dramatically decreased growth in soft agar and in xenografts growing in immunodeficient mice. Silencing LAMC2 caused cell cycle arrest and significantly suppressed migration, invasion and wound healing of ATC cells. Rescue experiments by overexpressing LAMC2 in LAMC2 knockdown cells, reversed the inhibitory effects as shown by increased cell proliferation and colony formation. Microarray data demonstrated that LAMC2 shRNA significantly altered expression of genes associated with migration, invasion, proliferation and survival. Immunoprecipitation studies showed that LAMC2 was bound to EGFR in ATC cells. Silencing of LAMC2 partially blocked EGF-mediated activation of EGFR and its downstream pathway. Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is an aggressive malignancy having no effective treatment. Laminin subunit gamma-2 (LAMC2) is an epithelial basement membrane protein involved in cell migration and tumour invasion and might represent an ideal target for the development of novel therapeutic approaches for ATC. LAMC2 was highly expressed in ATC samples and cell lines compared to normal thyroid tissues. Silencing LAMC2 by shRNA in ATC cells moderately inhibited cell growth in liquid culture and dramatically decreased growth in soft agar and in xenografts growing in immunodeficient mice. Silencing LAMC2 caused cell cycle arrest and significantly suppressed migration, invasion and wound healing of ATC cells. Rescue experiments by overexpressing LAMC2 in LAMC2 knockdown cells, reversed the inhibitory effects as shown by increased cell proliferation and colony formation. Microarray data demonstrated that LAMC2 shRNA significantly altered expression of genes associated with migration, invasion, proliferation and survival. Immunoprecipitation studies showed that LAMC2 was bound to EGFR in ATC cells. Silencing of LAMC2 partially blocked EGF-mediated activation of EGFR and its downstream pathway. LAMC2 was highly expressed in ATC samples and cell lines compared to normal thyroid tissues. Silencing LAMC2 by shRNA in ATC cells moderately inhibited cell growth in liquid culture and dramatically decreased growth in soft agar and in xenografts growing in immunodeficient mice. Silencing LAMC2 caused cell cycle arrest and significantly suppressed migration, invasion and wound healing of ATC cells. Rescue experiments by overexpressing LAMC2 in LAMC2 knockdown cells, reversed the inhibitory effects as shown by increased cell proliferation and colony formation. Microarray data demonstrated that LAMC2 shRNA significantly altered expression of genes associated with migration, invasion, proliferation and survival. Immunoprecipitation studies showed that LAMC2 was bound to EGFR in ATC cells. Silencing of LAMC2 partially blocked EGF-mediated activation of EGFR and its downstream pathway.

DESIGN
Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma cell lines (HTH83 and TL3) were infected with scrambled shRNA and LAMC2 shRNA and stable clones from each cell line were generated and used for RNA extraction and hybridization on Illumina Microarray. We compared scrambled shRNA stable cells with LAMC2 shRNA stable cells.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
24170107

