TITLE
Pouch transcriptional differences between UC and FAP indicate altered immune response.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
A total proctocolectomy with ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA) is considered the surgery of choice for definitive management of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and selected patients with ulcerative colitis (UC). However, this surgical treatment often associates with a long-term complication, pouchitis, which occurs mostly in UC patients. To better define the molecular background of pouchitis, the microarray-based survey was performed using pouch mucosal samples collected from 28 and 8 patients operated for UC and FAP, respectively. A number of 4771 genes was significantly differentiating uninflamed from inflamed mucosal samples, and their functional features were represented mostly by alerted metabolic and cell proliferation pathways. In contrast, functional analyses of aberrantly expressed probe sets between UC and FAP samples, irrespectively of mucosal inflammation status, revealed multiple pathways and terms which were linked to changes in immune response. Noteworthy, the comparison of uninflamed UC and FAP samples distinguished a set of 26 altered mRNAs including inflammation-related transcript encoding a Charcot-Leyden crystal (CLC) protein. The most discrete changes in gene expression profiles differentiating uninflamed UC and FAP mucosal samples were attributed to a Gene Ontology category innate immune response. Our study confirmed alterations of the immune responses as dominant in UC pouchitis which were earlier found in the studies using analyses of singular molecular elements. This observation may be important when managing IPAA patients.

DESIGN
Each sample represents three biopsies taken from single patient, from the same areas of the lower part of the pouch mucosa (above the rectal cuff) during endoscopic examination. 28 patients underwent surgery for UC and 8 patients for FAP.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

