TITLE
LncRNAs Expression in Preeclampsia Placenta Reveals the Potential Role of LncRNAs Contributing to Preeclampsia Pathogenesis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are an important class of pervasive genes involved in a variety of biological functions. They are aberrantly expressed in many types of diseases. We want to study the lncRNAs profiles in preeclampsia. Preeclampsia has been observed in patients with molar pregnancy where a fetus is absent demonstrating that the placenta is sufficient to cause the condition. So we analyze the lncRNAs profiles in preeclampsia placentas. In this study, we described the lncRNAs profiles in 6 preeclampsia placentas (T) and 5 matched normal pregnancy placentas (N) tissues by microarray. Methodology/Principal Findings: With abundant and varied probes accounting 33,045 LncRNAs in our microarray, the number of lncRNAs that expressed at a certain level could be detected is 28,443. From the data we found there were 738 lncRNAs that differentially expressed (≥1.5 fold-change) among preeclampsia placentas compared with matched controls. Up to 18,063 coding transcripts could be detected in placenta samples through 30,215 coding transcripts probes. Coding-non-coding gene co-expression networks (CNC network) were constructed based on the correlation analysis between the differential expressed lncRNAs and mRNAs. According to the GO-Pathway analysis of differential expressed lncRNAs/mRNAs, we choose three lncRNAs to analyze the relationship between lncRNAs and preeclampsia. LOC391533, LOC284100, CEACAMP8 were evaluated by qPCR in 40 of preeclampsia placentas and 40 of controls. The results showed three lncRNAs were aberrantly expressed in preeclampsia placentas compared with controls. Conclusions/Significance: Our study is the first one to determine genome-wide lncRNAs expression patterns in preeclampsia placenta by microarray. The results displayed that clusters of lncRNAs were aberrantly expressed in preeclampsia placenta compared with controls, which revealed that lncRNAs differentially expressed in preeclampsia placenta may exert a partial or key role in preeclampsia development. Misregulation of LOC391533, LOC284100, CEACAMP8 might be associated with preeclampsia. Taken together, this study may provide potential targets for future treatment of preeclampsia and novel insights into preeclampsia biology.

DESIGN
LncRNAs/mRNAs profiles in 6 preeclampsia placentas and 5 matched normal pregnancy placentas tissues by microarray using Arraystar v2.0.

PLATFORM
GPL15314 Arraystar Human LncRNA microarray V2.0 (Agilent_033010 Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
24312300

