TITLE
ER71/ETV2-mediated direct reprogramming of human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs) into endothelial-like cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Samples 1-6: HDFs transduced with ER71/ETV2 were sorted on KDR expression at day 7. The isolated KDR+ cells together with human umbilical venous endothelial cells (HUVECs) and untransduced HDFs were subjected to genomic gene expression profiling. A significant number of genes related with vessel development and angiogenesis was significantly upregulated in KDR+ cells, compared to control HDFs. These findings strongly argue that ER71/ETV2 directly reprograms human fibroblasts to functional endothelial-like cells, which could be useful for disease investigation as well as autologous cell therapy. Samples 7-12: HDFs transduced with ER71/ETV2 were sorted on KDR expression at day 7. The isolated KDR+ cells were further cultured up to day 93. The further cultured cells together with human umbilical venous endothelial cells (HUVECs) and untransduced HDFs were subjected to genomic gene expression profiling. A significant number of genes related with vessel development and angiogenesis was significantly upregulated in the further cultured cells, compared to control HDFs. These findings strongly argue that ER71/ETV2 directly reprograms human fibroblasts to functional endothelial-like cells, which could be useful for disease investigation as well as autologous cell therapy.

DESIGN
Samples 1-6: HDFs transduced with ER71/ETV2 were sorted on KDR expression at day 7. The isolated KDR+ cells together with human umbilical venous endothelial cells (HUVECs) and untransduced HDFs were subjected to genomic gene expression profiling. Samples 7-12: HDFs transduced with ER71/ETV2 were sorted on KDR expression at day 7. The isolated KDR+ cells were further cultured up to day 93. The further cultured cells together with human umbilical venous endothelial cells (HUVECs) and untransduced HDFs were subjected to genomic gene expression profiling.

PLATFORM
GPL15207 [PrimeView] Affymetrix Human Gene Expression Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

