TITLE
Towards a reference human platelet transcriptome: evaluation of inter-individual correlations and of its relationship with a platelet proteome

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
For the anucleate platelet it has been unclear how well platelet transcriptomes correlate among  different  donors  or  across  different  RNA  profiling  platforms,  and  what  the transcriptomes’  relationship  is  with  the  platelet  proteome.  We  generated  RNA-seq  pro-files  of  the  long  RNA  transcriptomes  from  the  platelets  of  10  healthy  young  males  (5 white and 5 black) with median age of 24.5 years, no notable clinical history, and no pre-vious history of thrombosis or bleeding. We also profiled the subjects’ messenger RNAs using the Affymetrix microarray gene expression system. We found that the abundance of  platelet  mRNA  transcripts  was  highly  correlated  across  the  10  individuals,  inde-pendently of race and of the employed technology. Our RNA-seq data also showed that these  high  inter-individual  correlations  extend  beyond  mRNAs  to  several  categories  of non-coding RNAs. Pseudogenes represented a notable exception to this by exhibiting a clear difference in expression by race. Comparison of our mRNA signatures with the only publicly available quantitative platelet proteome data showed that most (87.5%) identified platelet  proteins  had  a  detectable  corresponding  mRNA.  However,  a  high  number  of mRNAs that were present in the transcriptomes of all 10 individuals had no representa-tion  in  the  proteome.  The  Spearman  correlation  of  the  relative  abundances  for  those platelet  genes  that  were  represented  by  both  an  mRNA  and  a  protein  showed  a  weak (~0.3) yet statistically significant (P=5.0E-16) connection. Further analysis of the overlap-ping  and  non-overlapping  platelet  mRNAs  and  proteins  identified  gene  groups  corre-sponding to distinct cellular processes, a finding that provides novel insights for platelet biology. This represents the Affymetrix GeneChip component of the study only

DESIGN
10 Resting Human Platelet samples

PLATFORM
GPL6244 [HuGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
24524654

