TITLE
AMPK agonist AICAR improves cognition and motor coordination in young and aged mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Normal aging can result in a decline of memory and muscle function.  Exercise may prevent or delay these changes. However, aging associated frailty may preclude physical activity. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a transcriptional regulator important for muscle physiology. In the present study we investigated effects of AMPK agonist 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide riboside (AICAR) on memory and motor function in young (2-month-old), aged (23-month-old) C57Bl/6 mice, and transgenic mice with muscle-specific mutated AMPK alpha-subunit (AMPK-DN). Mice were injected with AICAR (500 mg/kg) for 3 to 14 days and tested in the Morris water maze, rotarod and open field.  Improved water maze performance and motor function was observed, albeit at longer duration of administration, in aged (14 days AICAR) than young (3 days AICAR) mice. In the AMPKDN mice, the compound did not enhance behavior, providing support for a muscle mediated mechanism. In addition, microarray analysis of muscle and hippocampal tissue derived from aged mice treated with AICAR revealed changes in gene expression in both tissues, which correlated with behavioral effects in a dose-dependent manner. Pronounced up-regulation of mitochondrial genes in muscle was observed. In the hippocampus genes relevant to neuronal development and plasticity were enriched. Altogether, endurance related factors may mediate both muscle and brain health in aging, and could play a role in new therapeutic interventions. Key words: Skeletal Muscle, Brain, Exercise, AMPK, Learning and Memory, Morris water maze

DESIGN
23-month old female C57BL/6J mice (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME) were housed under standard conditions, 3 mice per cage, with food and water ad libitum.  Mice were injected intraperitoneally with 5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-a-D-ribofuranoside (AICAR, Toronto Research Chemicals Inc., Canada) dissolved in saline, 500 mg/kg/day for 3 (ACR3), 7 (ACR7) or 14 (ACR14) days or saline vehicle, for 3 (CTR) days.   Thirty-three days after the final injection animals were deeply anesthetized with isofluorane and perfused transcardially with 0.9% NaCl solution.  The gastrocnemius muscle and Hippocampus were quickly removed, frozen on dry ice and stored at −80 °C for RNA isolation and microarray analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL6885 Illumina MouseRef-8 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
24443745

