TITLE
Transcriptome analysis of mvp mutant reveals important changes in global gene expression and a role of methyl-jasmonate in vernalization and flowering in wheat

ORGANISM
Triticum monococcum

SUMMARY
The maintained vegetative phase (mvp) mutant has a non-flowering phenotype caused by deletions including, but not limited to, the genes CYS, PHYC and VRN1. However the impact of these deletions on flowering genes and global gene expression is still unknown. In this study, we showed that these deletions caused the up-regulation of several pathogenesis related (PR) and jasmonate responsive genes using microarray analysis. Our results raise the hypothesis that jasmonates may be involved in flowering. To confirm this hypothesis, the methyl-jasmonate (MeJA) and jasmonic acid (JA) content in mvp and wild type plants was measured. The content of JA was comparable in all plants while the content of MeJA was higher in mvp plants.  Our transcriptomic and chemical analyses of the mvp mutants plants reveal that the deletion of the major vernalization gene TaVRN1 induces the up-regulation of the major biotic stress related genes and the accumulation of MeJA. In addition, our results demonstrate an important role of MeJA during vernalization and flowering in wheat.

DESIGN
A total of 3 biological replicates (R1, R2 and R3) for each condition (wild type (control) and mvp mutant (mutant) ) were used for microarray analyses. Each biological replicate sample was obtained by pooling three wild type plants (control) or five mvp plants (mutant) from different plants harvested randomly. The different biological samples of einkorn spring wheat whole aerial part were ground in dry ice to fine powder and total RNA was extracted with trizol (Invitrogen, Burlington, ON, CA). Total RNA was cleaned using RNeasy plant mini kit (Qiagen) and integrity was determined on agarose gel and on a bioanalyser (Agilent 2100). Synthesized cDNAs were transcribed to cRNAs with the 3’IVT labelling kit (Santa Clara, CA, USA) and hybridized to the Affymetrix wheat genome array (Santa Clara, Ca, USA) at the McGill University and Génome Québec Innovation Centre (Montreal, Qc, CA). The experimental design consisted of three biological replicates for each of the two conditions, 1: The einkorn wheat  (Triticum monococcum L. 2n = 2x = 14, AmAm) wild type plants (control) and 2: the mvp plants (mutant). Thus, a total of 3 biological samples from each of the two conditions described above were used for hybridizations.

PLATFORM
GPL3802 [wheat] Affymetrix Wheat Genome Array

CITATIONS
24683181

