TITLE
SOCS2 expression correlates with tumor malignancy, exerts growth promoting effects and is enhanced by androgens in prostate cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Deregulation of cytokine- and growth factor signaling due to altered expression of endogenous regulators is well recognized in prostate and other cancers. Suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 (SOCS2) is a key regulator of growth hormone, IGF and prolactin signaling, that have been implicated in carcinogenesis. In this study we elucidate expression pattern and functional significance of SOCS2 in prostate cancer (PCa). Protein expression analysis employing tissue microarrays from two independent patient cohorts revealed significantly enhanced expression in tumor compared to benign tissue as well as association with Gleason score and disease progression. In vitro and in vivo assays uncovered the involvement of SOCS2 in the regulation of cell growth and apoptosis. Functionally, SOCS2 knockdown inhibited prostate cancer cell proliferation and xenograft growth in a CAM assay. Decreased cell growth after SOCS2 downregulation was associated with cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. In addition, we prove for the first time that SOCS2 expression is significantly elevated upon androgenic stimulation in androgen receptor-positive cell lines, providing a possible mechanistic explanation for high SOCS2 levels in PCa tissue. Consequently, SOCS2 expression correlated with androgen receptor expression in malignant tissue of patients. Taken together, our study linked increased SOCS2 expression in PCa with a pro-proliferative role in vitro and in vivo.

DESIGN
Prostate cancer cell lines LNCaP, DUCaP and VCaP cells were cultured in the absence or presence of R1881, an androgen in three independent experiments. Differential gene expression was determined by comparing R1881 treated samples with the corresponding controls (EtOH treated samples).

PLATFORM
GPL17737 [HuGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Array [HuGene10stv1_68_020]

CITATIONS
24280133 , 26052614

