TITLE
Next-generation sequencing analyses of the differently expressed genes of wild type and atcep1 mutant Arabidopsis thaliana

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Purpose: The goal of this study is to compare the differently expressed genes in the wild type and the KDEL-tailed cysteine protease AtCEP1 knockout (atcep1) Arabidopsis using RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq). Methods: Arabidopsis buds mRNA profiles of anther development stages 5-6, 7-9, and 10-11 of the wild type (WT) and atcep1 mutant were generated by deep sequencing via Illumina HiSeqTM 2000. The sequence reads that passed quality filters were analyzed at the transcript isoform level with the following steps: Remove reads with adaptor sequences; Remove reads in which the percentage of unknown bases (N) is greater than 10%; Remove low quality reads, in which the percentage of the low quality base (base with quality value ≤ 5) is greater than 50%. The clean reads were mapped to the Arabidopsis reference genome and reference genes using SOAP aligner/SOAP2. No more than 2 mismatches were allowed in the alignment. The gene expression level was calculated using RPKM (Reads Per Kb per Million reads). Differential expression analysis between the wild type and the atcep1 mutant was performed using the DEGseq R package (1.12.0) based on normalized read counts. A corrected P value of < 0.005 and |log2Ratio| > 1 were set as the threshold for significantly differential expression. Results: We identified 872 genes showing significant differential expression, and in the atcep1 mutant, the upregulated genes significantly outnumbered the downregulated genes at the three time points. The GO analysis of the differently expressed genes showed that the expression of genes participating in anther tapetal secretory structure formation, pollen wall development, and tapetal cell wall generation, clearly changed.

DESIGN
Arabidopsis buds mRNA profiles of development stages 5-6, 7-9, and 10-11 of the wild type (WT) and atcep1 muant were generated by deep sequencing via Illumina HiSeqTM 2000.

PLATFORM
GPL13222 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Arabidopsis thaliana)

CITATIONS
25035401

