TITLE
Expression data from fission yeast deletion mutant of Klf1, a C2H2 zinc finger-transcription factor, in G0 and VE phases

ORGANISM
Schizosaccharomyces pombe

SUMMARY
Fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe is a model for studying cellular quiescence. Shifting to medium without a nitrogen-source induces proliferative cells to enter long-term G0 quiescence. Klf1 is a Kruppel-like transcription factor with a 7-amino acid-spaced C2H2-type zinc finger motif. The deletion mutant ∆klf1 normally divides in vegetative medium, but proliferation is not restored after long-term G0 quiescence. Cell biologic, transcriptomic, and metabolomic analyses revealed a unique phenotype of the ∆klf1 mutant in quiescence. Mutant cells had diminished transcripts related to signaling molecules for switching to differentiation. In contrast, proliferative metabolites for cell-wall assembly and antioxidants significantly increased. Further, the size of the ∆klf1 cells is markedly increased during quiescence due to the aberrant accumulation of calcofluor-positive chitin-like materials beneath the cell wall. After 4 weeks quiescence, the ability for reversible proliferation is lost, but energy metabolism is maintained. Klf1 thus plays a role in G0 phase longevity through enhancing the differentiation signal and suppressing metabolism for growth. If Klf1 is lost, S. pombe fails to maintain a constant cell size during quiescence.

DESIGN
Gene expression profile of fission yeast wild type cells and klf1-gene disruptant cells in proliferating state and in quiescent state. Type of experiment: Comparing between wild type cells and klf1-gene disruptant cells in proliferating condition and in quiescent condition. Experimental factor: Exponentially proliferating state in synthetic medium, EMM2, and quiescent G0 state in nitrogen-depleted synthetic medium, EMM2-N. Quality control steps taken: All experiments were repeated twice in each condition.

PLATFORM
GPL2529 [Yeast_2] Affymetrix Yeast Genome 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

