TITLE
Transcriptome comparison of bat (Miniopterus natalensis) forelimb and hindlimb autopods at developmental stages CS16 and CS17 and E13.5 mouse forelimb autopods

ORGANISM
Mus musculus ; Miniopterus natalensis

SUMMARY
The bat offers an alternative paradigm to the standard mouse and chick model of limb development as it has extremely divergent forelimbs (long digits supporting a wing) and hindlimbs (short digits and claws) due the distinct requirements of both aerial and terrestrial locomotion. We used a cross-species microarray approach to identify differentially expressed (DE) genes between the bat (Minniopterus natalensis) forelimb and hindlimb autopods at Carollia developmental stages (CS) 16 and CS17, and between the bat (CS17) and mouse (E13.5) forelimb autopods. Several DE genes were identified, including two homeobox genes, Meis2, a proximal limb-patterning gene, and Hoxd11, a gene involved in digit elongation. Both genes are significantly over-expressed in the developing bat forelimb as compared to the hindlimb and equivalently staged mouse forelimbs.

DESIGN
A reference design was used in this microarray experiment. A pool of left and right mouse forelimb autopods from 24 embryos was used as the reference sample. This sample was directly compared to individual CS16 and CS17 bat fore- and hindlimbs (left and right of one individual pooled) that were classified as the test conditions. Four experimental sessions were performed using an independently amplified mouse reference pool and 4 biological repeats for the bat limbs. These samples were co-hybridised to OPERON Mouse OpArray (ver. 4.0) spotted oligonucleotide slides to perform a competitive Cross-Species Hybridisation experiment. The bat aRNA (test) samples were labelled with Cy3 dye (green signal), the mouse aRNA (reference) sample was labelled with Cy5 dye (red signal).

PLATFORM
GPL17745 Operon OpArray - Mus Musculus - 38k v4.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

