TITLE
A microarrays-based analysis of gametogenesis in two Portuguese populations of the European clam Ruditapes decussatus

ORGANISM
Ruditapes decussatus

SUMMARY
The European clam, Ruditapes decussatus (Linnaeus, 1758) is a bivalve mollusc of the family Veneridae native to the European Atlantic and Mediterranean coastal waters. Its production is exclusively based on natural recruitment, which is subject to high annual fluctuations due to adversely affected by pollution and other environmental factors. Microarray analyses have been performed in four gonadal maturation stages of two higly productive Portuguese wild populations (Ria Formosa in South and Ria de Aveiro in North) characterized by different responses to spawning induction.

DESIGN
Twenty clams (Ruditapes decussatus)were monthly sampled between July 2011 and July 2012 in two different Portuguese wild populations: Ria Formosa and Ria de Aveiro. At each sampling date the gonads of the collected clams were immediately dissected for RNA extraction and fixed for histological analysis.  Total RNA was isolated using Extract-all (Eurobio) procedure. RNA quality and integrity was controlled on the Agilent bioanalyzer using RNA nanochips and Agilent RNA 6000 nanoreagents (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany). RNA concentrations were measured at 260 nm using a ND-1000 spectrophotometer (Nanodrop Technologies) using the conversion factor 1 OD = 40 mg/mL total RNA. Samples were stored at -80°C until further use. Gene expression profiling was performed using an R.decussatus oligo-DNA microarray of 59,951 probes based on single-colour detection (Cyanine-3 only). Microarrays were scanned with Agilent scanner G2565BA at a resolution of 2 microns; all slides were scanned twice at two different sensitivity settings (XDRHi 100% and XDRLo 10%); the scanner software created a unique ID for each pair of XDR scans and saved it to both scan image files. FeatureExtraction v10.7.3.1 used XDR ID to link the pairs of scans together automatically when extracting data. The signal left after all the FE processing steps have been completed is ProcessedSignal that contains the Multiplicatively Detrended, Background-Subtracted Signal.

PLATFORM
GPL17766 UniversityPadova_Ruditapes philippinarum_8x60K

CITATIONS
24643002

