TITLE
Dermal Wound Transcriptomic Responses to Infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa versus Klebsiella pneumoniae

ORGANISM
Oryctolagus cuniculus

SUMMARY
Bacterial infections of wounds are associated with poor healing and worse scarring. We sought to identify transcriptomic patterns associated with impaired healing of wounds infected with Klebsiella pneumoniae (K.p.) or Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P.a.) using a rabbit ear wound model. Wounds created on post-operative day (POD) 0 were infected on POD3, within the inflammatory phase of healing. On POD4 the infected wounds were harvested for microarray/transcriptome analysis. Other wounds with 24-hour infections were treated with topical antibiotic to promote biofilm formation and harvested on POD6 or POD12. On POD4 before antibiotic treatment, both wounds contained elevated transcripts that enriched predominantly into inflammation/infection-response pathways and functions characteristic of infiltrating leukocytes. But there were 5-fold more elevated transcripts in P.a.- than K.p.-infected wounds. Additionally, unique to P.a.-infected wounds, was a minor network of inflammation/infection-response molecules with predicted upstream regulation predominated by type I interferons. Also on POD4, Dnr-transcripts of both wounds were enriched into stress-response pathways such as EIF2 signaling. But there were 8-fold more Dnr-transcripts in P.a.- than K.p.-infected wounds, and many more of them enriched in the function, cell death, suggesting that resident dermal cells of P.a.-infected wounds failed to survive a more destructive P.a. infection. On POD6, following two days of antibiotic treatment, the biofilm-colonized wounds expressed magnitudes fewer inflammation and stress-response transcripts. However, a single regulatory network of P.a.-infected wounds was found to consist of Upr-transcripts enriching immune/infection-response functions predicted to be regulated by type I interferons, which was similar to the network unique to P.a.-infected wounds on POD4. On POD12, genes expressed by K.p.-infected wounds suggesting healing, while for P.a.-infected wounds they suggested stalled healing. The similarities and differences between the wound responses to these infections further define the molecular foundations of healing impaired by infections.

DESIGN
Rabbit ear Wounds created on post-operative day (POD) 0 were infected with Klebsiella pneumoniae (K.p.) or Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P.a.) on POD3 and harvested on POD4 for RNA extraction. Other wounds with 24-hour infections were treated with topical antibiotic to promote biofilm formation and harvested on POD6 or POD12.

PLATFORM
GPL7083 Agilent-020908 Oryctolagus cuniculus (Rabbit) Oligo Microarray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

