TITLE
Transcriptome dynamics of Arabidopsis thaliana root penetration by the oomycete pathogen Phytophthora parasitica

ORGANISM
Phytophthora parasitica INRA-310

SUMMARY
Oomycetes from the genus Phytophthora are fungus-like plant pathogens that are devastating for agriculture and natural ecosystems. Due to particular physiological characteristics, no treatments against diseases caused by oomycetes are presently available. To develop such treatments, it appears essential to dissect the molecular mechanisms that determine the interaction between Phytophthora species and host plants. The present project is focused on the molecular mechanisms that underlie the compatible plant-oomycete interaction and plant disease.The laboratory developed a novel interaction system involving the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana and Phytophthora parasitica, a soil-borne pathogen infecting a wide host range, thus representing the majority of Phytophthora species. A characteristic feature of the compatible Arabidopsis/Phytophthora parasitica interaction is an extended biotrophic phase, before infection becomes necrotrophic. Because the initial biotrophic phase is extremely short on natural (e.g. solanaceous) hosts, the Arabidopsis system provides the opportunity to analyze, for both interaction partners, the molecular events that determine the initiation of infection and the switch to necrotrophy.The present project aims at analyzing the compatible interaction between A. thaliana roots and Phytophthora parasitica. The Affymetrix A. thaliana full genome chip will be used to characterize modulations of the transcriptome occurring over a period of 24h from the onset of plant root infection to the beginning of necrotrophy. Parallel to this study, a custom designed Phytophthora parasitica biochip will enable analyzing of Phytophthora parasitica gene expression during the same stages. The pathosystem involving A. thaliana and Phytophthora parasitica was described in Attard A, Gourgues M, Callemeyn-Torre N, Keller H. 2010. The New phytologist 187: 449–460.  The protocol for recovery of RNA from purified appressoria was described in Kebdani N, Pieuchot L, Deleury E, Panabieres F, Le Berre JY, Gourgues M. 2010.  New Phytol 185: 248–257.

DESIGN
A series of 14 hybridizations corresponding to two biological replicates each corresponding to RNA extractions of the following biological conditions were used: 1-Vegetative mycelium (recovered from two samples of 4 day-old cultures in liquid V8 medium at 24°C), 2- Motile zoospores (recovered from 8 independent cultures), 3-Appressoria differentiated on onion epidermis (epidermis from 20 onion bulbs inoculated with zoospores collected from 8 independent Petri dishes); appressoria collected 3 hours after inoculation (24 °C), 5- Infection of A. thaliana roots by Phytophthora parasitica zoospores (samples recovered at 2.5, 6, 10.5 and 30 hours post inoculation; 5 inoculated plants for each sample).

PLATFORM
GPL17781 Phytophthora parasitica array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

