TITLE
Gene expression profiles of Sunitinib-treated but not untreated short-term serum-free cultures predict treatment response of human high-grade gliomas in vitro

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
High-grade gliomas are amongst the most deadly human tumors. Treatment results are overall disappointing. Nevertheless, in several trials around 20% of patients respond to therapy. Diagnostic strategies to identify those patients that will ultimately profit from a specific targeted therapy are urgently needed. Gene expression profiling of untreated tumors is a well established approach for identifying biomarkers or diagnostic signatures. However, reliable signatures predicting treatment response in gliomas do not exist. Here we suggest a novel strategy for developing diagnostic signatures. We postulate that predictive gene expression patterns emerge only after tumor cells have been treated with the agent in vitro. Moreover, we postulate that enriching specimens for tumor initiating cells sharpens predictive expression patterns. Here, we report on the prediction of treatment response of cancer cells in vitro. As a proof of principle we analyzed gene expression in 18 short-term serum-free cultures of high-grade gliomas enhanced for brain tumor initiating cells (BTIC) before and after in vitro treatment with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor Sunitinib. Profiles from treated but not from untreated glioma cells allowed to predict therapy-induced impairment of proliferation of glioma cells in vitro. Prediction can be achieved with as little as 6 genes allowing for a straightforward translation into the clinic once the predictive power of the signature is shown also in vivo. Our strategy of using expression profiles from in vitro treated BTIC-enriched cultures opens new ways for trial design for patients with malignant gliomas.

DESIGN
72 samples; 18 brain tumor initiating cells (BTICs); 4 treatment conditions: 1 µM Sunitinib or 0.00025% DMSO with and without the combination of  recombinant growth factors VEGF and PDGF-AB for 6 hours

PLATFORM
GPL11532 [HuGene-1_1-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.1 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
25268354

