TITLE
Expression data from chicken preadipocytes

ORGANISM
Gallus gallus

SUMMARY
Gene expression profiles of chicken preadipocytes were constructed using Chicken Genome Arrays to determine the gene expression patterns of preadipocytes derived from two chicken lines divergently selected for abdominal fat content. Oleate was used as an inducer of preadipocyte differentiation, and the different expressed genes between the normal and oleate treated preadipocyte were analyzed.

DESIGN
Cultured preadipocytes were divided into four groups, including the lean line preadipocytes cultured normally (LC), the fat line preadipocytes cultured normally (FC), the lean line preadipocytes treated with oleate (L) and the fat line preadipocytes treated with oleate (F). For the lean and fat chicken lines respectively, the abdominal adipose tissues of 15 male birds with 10 day-old were excised and pooled. The pooled abdominal adipose tissues were digested. Digestion was followed by filtration through a 20um screen and centrifugation at 800 g for 10 min at room temperature. This phase allowed the separation of floating adipocytes from the preadipocytes. The preadipocytes were treated with ACK lysis buffer to remove the red blood cells. The preadipocytes at this stage with a high purity were not cultured and a part of the preadipocytes were collected as the 0001 time point. The remaining preadipocytes were seeded at a density of 5x10^4 cells/cm2 in the medium and maintained at 37°C in a humidified, 5% CO2 atmosphere until confluence (3 to 4 d). The preadipocytes were passaged once and harvested when 50% confluent (named as -12h) and 95% confluent (named as 0h). From the 0h time point, the preadipocytes were divided into two groups. The preadipocytes in one group were treated with 160 ug/ml oleate. The preadipocytes in another group were cultured with normal situation as the control. The preadipocytes from the oleate treated and control groups were collected at 12h, 24h, 72h and 120h.

PLATFORM
GPL3213 [Chicken] Affymetrix Chicken Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

