TITLE
Effect of ARF on the transcription of p53 target genes in homologous recombination deficient cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
ARF is a tumour suppressor activated by oncogenic stress, which stabilizes p53. Although p53 is a key component of the response to DNA damage, a similar function for ARF has not been ascribed. In this work we show that homologous recombination (HR) -deficient primary mouse and human cells accumulate DNA damage, which triggers checkpoint signalling and ARF activation. We also show that in the absence of ARF p53 is induce in response to DNA damage, but surprisingly fails to trigger senescence. The hypothesis tested in this study was that ARF deficiency alters the spectrum of genes activated by p53 in response to HR deficiency. Using mRNA microarray analysis and expression profiling, we identified genes upregulated in wild type primary MEFs treated with RAD51 shRNA, whose expression was not induced in similarly treated Arf -/- primary MEFs. Clustering analysis of p53 transcriptional targets with increased expression in RAD51-depleted cells revealed three groups: genes requiring functional ARF for their expression, genes transcribed in an ARF-independent manner and genes that are upregulated in both ARF-proficient and ARF-deficient cells. Among the genes in the last group we found Cdkn1a(p21), encoding the p21 inhibitor of cyclindependent kinases and well-characterized effector of the p53 role in promoting senescence. The subset of p53 targets requiring ARF for their transcription was specifically upregulated in response to RAD51 inhibition in wild type, but not Arf -/- MEFs. Among these genes, two encoded the dual specificity phosphatase (DUSP) family members DUSP4 and DUSP7, which act as ERK phosphatases and negative regulators of the MAPK kinase pathway in mammalian cells.

DESIGN
Four samples were analysed (WT or ARF negative cells transfected with GFP or RAD51 shRNAs) in duplicate. Samples treated with GFP shRNA are the reference samples and the ones treated with RAD51 shRNA are the experimental ones (RAD51 depletion leads to HR deficiency). The WT cell line is our control cell line to study the effect of HR deficiency on the transcription of p53 target genes

PLATFORM
GPL6887 Illumina MouseWG-6 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
24162189

