TITLE
Global Analysis of the Transcriptional Response of Chinese cabbage (Brassica rapa ssp. pekinensis) to Methyl Jasmonate Reveals JA Signaling on Enhancement of Secondary Metabolism Pathways

ORGANISM
Brassica rapa subsp. pekinensis

SUMMARY
We conducted a RNA-Seq analysis of MeJA-treated Chinese cabbage leaf transcriptome. Total 14,619,469 sequence reads were generated to produce 27,461 detected genes, among which 1,451 genes were up-regulated and 991 genes were down-regulated as differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (log2 ratio ≥1, false discovery rate ≤0.001). More than 90% of the DEGs (2,278) were between 1.0- and 3.0-fold (log2 ratio). The most highly represented pathways by 1,674 annotated DEGs were related to “metabolic pathways” (333 members), “ribosome” (314 members), “biosynthesis of secondary metabolites” (218 members), “plant-pathogen interaction” (146 members), and “plant hormone signal transduction” (99 members). Fourteen genes involved in JA biosynthesis pathway were up-regulated. As many as 182 genes for the biosynthesis of several secondary metabolites were induced, and the level of indole glucosinolate was highly increased by MeJA treatment. The genes encoding sugar catabolism and some amino acids synthesis were up-regulated, which could supply structural intermediates and energy for the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites. The results demonstrated a high degree of transcriptional complexity with dynamic coordinated changes in global gene expression of Chinese cabbage in response to MeJA treatment. It expands our understanding of the complex molecular events on JA-induced plant resistance and accumulation of secondary metabolites. It also provides a foundation for further studies on the molecular mechanisms of different pathways in other Brassica crops under MeJA treatment.

DESIGN
Transcriptomic analysis of MeJA-treated Chinese cabbage leaf

PLATFORM
GPL17788 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Brassica rapa subsp. pekinensis)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

