TITLE
Use of an activated beta-catenin to identify Wnt/beta-catenin pathway target genes in C. elegans, including a subset of collagen genes expressed in late larval development

ORGANISM
Caenorhabditis elegans

SUMMARY
The Wnt signaling pathway plays a fundamental role during the development of metazoans, where it functions in the regulation of diverse processes including cell fate specification, cell migration, and stem cell renewal.  Activation of the beta-catenin dependent or canonical Wnt signaling pathway upregulates expression of Wnt target genes to mediate an appropriate cellular response.  In the nematode C. elegans, a Wnt signaling pathway similar to the canonical pathway regulates several processes during larval development, however few target genes of this pathway have been identified. To address this deficit, we conditionally activated Wnt signaling in living animals during a defined stage of larval life by expressing a dominant, activated beta-catenin protein, then used microarray analysis to identify genes showing altered expression compared to control animals. In this way we identified 166 differentially expressed genes, of which 104 were upregulated.  A subset of the upregulated genes were validated by qPCR and showed altered expression in Wnt pathway mutants with decreased or increased Wnt signaling; we consider these genes to be candidate Wnt pathway targets in the C. elegans hermaphrodite larva.  Amongst these was a group of 6 genes, including the cuticular collagen genes, bli-1 col-38, col-49 and col-71, that show a peak of expression in the mid L4 stage during normal development.  The L4 expression of these genes suggests they may be expressed for use in the adult cuticle, and consistent with this, reduction of function for several of the genes leads to phenotypes suggestive of defects in cuticle function or integrity.  Therefore this work has identified a large number of putative Wnt pathway target genes during larval life, including a small subset of Wnt-regulated collagen genes that may function in synthesis of the adult cuticle.

DESIGN
a single pulse heat shock, inducing over-activated signal transduction in the Exp. Three treatment with three control strains of the identical genetical background strains

PLATFORM
GPL200 [Celegans] Affymetrix C. elegans Genome Array

CITATIONS
24569038

