TITLE
Gene changes in response to asbestos and carbon nanotube exposure in the pleural cavity, measured using microarrays.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Exposure to asbestos fibres causes profound pathological changes in the pleural cavity and can result in the development of a fatal tumour, malignant mesothelioma (MM). Due to their structural similarities there is concern that carbon nanotubes (CNTs) may present a similar inhalation hazard. However the underlying mechanisms leading to fibre-mediated mesothelioma development are not yet fully understood. To investigate the molecular changes which occur at the mesothelium as a consequence of direct exposure to fibres, short and long asbestos fibres (SFA and LFA) and short and long CNTs (NTS and NTL) were instilled directly into the pleural cavity in mice. After 12 weeks RNA was extracted from the diaphragm and microarray analysis was performed on all of the treatment groups compared to a 0.5% BSA/saline control. Concurrent histopatholgical investigations were performed and revealed that exposure to fibres resulted in responses that were dependent upon the length of the fibres, but not on fibre type. In response to NTL and LFA there was acute inflammation and fibrosis on the parietal pleura; no inflammatory changes were detected histologically after exposure to SFA and NTS. Furthermore, changes in the mTOR signalling pathway were observed. Thus, this study served to illustrate which pathways are involved in the development of fibre-mediated toxicity, and demonstrated that pleural lesions induced by long asbestos fibres and long CNT exhibit a common pro-oncogenic molecular signature.

DESIGN
Single channel microarrays were performed on n=4 samples. There was one control (0.5% BSA/saline) group and 4 treatment groups; SFA (short asbestos fibres), LFA (long asbestos fibres), NTS (short carbon nanotubes) and NTL (long carbon nanotubes).

PLATFORM
GPL10787 Agilent-028005 SurePrint G3 Mouse GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

