TITLE
The omega subunit of the RNA polymerase core directs transcription efficiency in cyanobacteria

ORGANISM
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803

SUMMARY
The catalytic core of the RNA polymerase of most eubacteria is composed of two α subunits and β, β’ and ω subunits. In Escherichia coli, the ω subunit (encoded by the rpoZ gene) has been suggested to assist β’ during RNA polymerase core assembly. The function of the ω subunit is particularly interesting in cyanobacteria because the cyanobacterial β’ is split to N-terminal γ and C-terminal β’ subunits. The ∆rpoZ strain of the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 grew well in standard conditions although the mutant cells showed low light-saturated photosynthetic activity, low Rubisco content and accumulated high quantities of protective carotenoids and α-tocopherol. The ∆rpoZ strain contained 15% less of the primary σ factor, SigA, than the control strain, and recruitment of SigA to the RNA polymerase core was inefficient in ∆rpoZ. Thus, a cyanobacterial RNA polymerase holoenzyme lacking the ω subunit contains less frequently the primary σ factor. A DNA microarray analysis revealed that this leads to specific down-regulation of highly expressed genes, like genes encoding subunits for Rubisco, ATP synthase, NADH-dehydrogenase and carbon concentrating mechanisms. On the contrary, many genes showing only low or moderate expression in the control strain were up-regulated in ∆rpoZ. A conserved -10 region was detected in promoters showing up or down-regulation in ∆rpoZ, but -35 regions of down-regulated genes completely differed from -35 regions of up-regulated genes.

DESIGN
Cells from cyanobacteria Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 named as control strain (CS) and RNA polymerase omega subunit inactivation strain, ΔrpoZ, were harvested (A730=1, 40 mL) directly from standard growth conditions (continuous illumination at the PPFD of 40 µmol m-2s-1, 32°C, ambient CO2). From three to four independent experiments were performed at each conditions.

PLATFORM
GPL17595 Agilent-016989 Synechocystis array [ORF version]

CITATIONS
24476911

