TITLE
Transcriptomic analysis reveals differential response in the teleost spleens and head kidneys towards vaccination and pathogen challenge

ORGANISM
Lates calcarifer

SUMMARY
In this study we attempt to elucidate some of the pathways involved in the immune response to vaccination and subsequent disease challenge using a transcriptomic approach.  We exposed, via intra-peritoneal injection, three months old Asian seabass (Lates calcarifer) to a Streptococcus iniae vaccine. A control group was also set up where no vaccine was injected. Spleen and head kidney samples were collected at one and seven days post vaccination for transcriptomic analysis. At this point, there are four groups per organ: Day 1 vaccinated, Day 1 control, Day 7 vaccinated and Day 7 control.  Subsequently, a pathogen challenge was carried out three weeks later and spleen and head kidneys were sampled at 25-29 hours post challenge for transcriptomic analysis. For control, mock challenged was carried out. At this point, there are four groups per organ: unvaccinated challenged, unvaccinated mock challenged, vaccinated challenged and vaccinated mock challenged.

DESIGN
Total 57 samples.     Spleen samples:  At Day 1 and Day 7 post vaccination, 4 spleens were analyzed for each of the D1 control and D1 vaccinated groups and 3 spleens were analyzed for each of the D7 control and D7 vaccinated groups  (total = 14 samples). At post pathogen challenge, 4 spleens were analyzed for each of these three groups - unvaccinated mock challenged, vaccinated challenged and vaccinated mock challenged and 3 spleens for the unvaccinated challenged group (total = 15 samples).    Head Kidney samples: At Day 1 and Day 7 post vaccination, 3 head kidneys were analyzed for the control and vaccinated groups for both time points (total = 12 samples). At post pathogen challenge, 4 head kidneys were analyzed for each of the groups:  unvaccinated challenged, unvaccinated mock challenged, vaccinated challenged and vaccinated mock challenged (total = 16 samples).

PLATFORM
GPL17855 Agilent-045004 Sea Bass v3 with 300Techreps_3

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

