TITLE
Microarray gene expression analysis of tumorigenesis and regional lymph node metastasis in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Objective: The purpose of this study was to investigate the molecular basis of tumorigenesis and regional lymph node metastasis in LSCC, and provide a set of genes that may be useful for the development of novel diagnostic markers and/or more effective therapeutic strategies. Methods: A total number of 10 patients who underwent surgery for primary laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma were recruited for microarray analysis. LSCC tissues compared with corresponding adjacent non-neoplastic tissues were analysed by Illumina mRNA microarrays,and LSCC tissues with regional lymph node metastasis and LSCC tissues without regional lymph node metastasis were analyzed in the same manner.The most frequently differently expressed genes screened by microarrays were also validated by qRT-PCR in another 42 patients diagnosed for LSCC . Results: Analysed by Illumina mRNA microarrays,there were 361 genes significantly related to tumorigenesis while 246 genes significantly related to regional lymph node metastasis in LSCC. We found that the six genes (CDK1,CDK2,CDK4,MCM2,MCM3,MCM4) were most frequently differently expressed functional genes related to tumorigenesis while eIF3a and RPN2 were most frequently differently expressed functional genes related to regional lymph node metastasis in LSCC. The expressions of these genes were also validated by qRT-PCR. Conclusions: The research revealed a gene expression signature of tumorigenesis and regional lymph node metastasis in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma.Of the total, the deregulation of several genes (CDK1, CDK2, CDK4, MCM2, MCM3, MCM4, EIF3a and RPN2) were potentially associated with disease development and progression. The result will contribute to the understanding of the molecular basis of LSCC and help to improve diagnosis and treatment.

DESIGN
A total number of 10 patients who underwent surgery for primary laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma were recruited for microarray analysis. LSCC tissues compared with corresponding adjacent non-neoplastic tissues were analysed by Illumina mRNA microarrays,and LSCC tissues with regional lymph node metastasis and LSCC tissues without regional lymph node metastasis were analyzed in the same manner.The most frequently differently expressed genes screened by microarrays were also validated by qRT-PCR in another 42 patients diagnosed for LSCC .

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

