TITLE
Genome wide analysis of transcriptome and microRNAs in early stage of Alzheimer’s disease (microRNA)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
We addressed the integrated analysis of mRNA and miRNA expression levels of Tg6799 AD model mice at 4 month and 8 months of age. Total 8 gene cluster modules for co-expression network were predicted from transcriptome data and 6 modules were show relation  with AD or aging. We constructed early stage AD network using data integration between mRNA and miRNA profiles and predicted miRNAs strongly involved in module regulation. We found that ARRDC3 showed AD mutation dependent changes of expression and was related metabolic dysfunction in early stage AD. These results demonstrate that candidate genes on the simultaneous profiling of mRNA and miRNA expressions in genome wide can be used for the understanding of non-coding RNA related gene expression in early stage AD. We suggested that our results could be future candidate to be developed as early biomarkers in progressive AD pathology.  This result can be used for the further application in neurodegenerative diseases.

DESIGN
Tg6799 transgenic mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (USA) and were housed under a 12h light-dark cycle with free access to food and water. Female Tg6799 mice are maintained until 4 months and 8 months of age (for littermate control: LM and mutant subjects: MT). RNA samples were isolated from hippocampus of mice using TRI-Reagent (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Gene expression was analyzed with GeneChip® Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Arrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA), which is comprised of over 45,000 probe sets representing approximately 28,700 well-characterized mouse genes. The  Ion Total RNA-Seq Kit v2 (Lifetechnologies, USA) was used for the preparation of micro RNA libraries according to the manufacturer's instructions. Total numbers of subject used are as followed: 1) LM 4 months : MT 4 months : LM 8 months : MT 8 months (2:4:2:4) for screening mRMA and miRNA, 2) LM 4 months : MT 4 months : LM 8 months : MT 8 months (4:4:4:4) for expression verification.

PLATFORM
GPL16331 Ion Torrent PGM (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
25086961

