TITLE
Murine host body reactions to implanted scaffolds: non-coat polystyrene scaffold vs. collagen- or PMB-coated scaffold

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
This study investigated early host reactions to implanted materials to predict successful tissue regeneration with implant. Three kinds of scaffold, i.e., non-coat, collagen-coated, and PMB-coated porous polystylene scaffolds were implanted subcutaneously in mice dorsal area. Those scaffolds were used as bio-incomopatible materials, appropriate materials for tissue regeneration (bio active), and inappropriate to regenration (bio-inert) scaffolds. Seven days after implantation, scaffolds were explanted and total RNA was isolated from infiltrated host cells into scaffold by laser microdissection. Gene expressions of cells in collagen-  and PMB-coated scaffold were normalized using results of non coat scaffold. Genes with more than 2-fold difference between collagen and PMB were picked up and narrowed to related keywords; inflammation, angiogenesis, wound healing, and mcrophage polarization. Among those genes, interluekin (IL)-1beta which promote both inflammation and wound healing was up-regulated in collagen-coated scaffold. On the other hand, IL-10 which suppress both inflammation and wound healing was up-regulated in PMB-coated scaffold. Angiogenesis-promoting genes were up-regulated and angiogenesis suppressve genes were suppressed in collagen. Up-regulation of IL-1b and the angiogenesis-relating genes inside the porous scaffolds are the possibly important factors for controlling tissue regeneration.

DESIGN
Three-condition experiment, host cells infiltrated in non coat (reference), collagen-coated, and PMB-coated scaffolds. Two-microarray condition experiments, collagen vs. non coat and PMB coat vs. non coat. Hybridization: 2 replicates. Scanning: 3 replicates. Biological experiments: once.

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
24454803

