TITLE
DRM complex mutant lin-54 vs. H3K36 methyltransferase mutant mes-4 vs. lin-54; mes-4 double mutant vs. wild type C.elegans germline

ORGANISM
Caenorhabditis elegans

SUMMARY
Here we uncover antagonistic regulation of transcript levels in the germline of Caenorhabditis elegans hermaphrodites. The histone methyltransferase MES-4 marks genes expressed in the germline with methylated Lys36 on histone H3 (H3K36me) and promotes their transcription; MES-4 also represses genes normally expressed in somatic cells and genes on the X chromosomes. The DRM complex, which includes E2F/DP and Retinoblastoma homologs, affects germline gene expression and prevents excessive repression of X-chromosome genes. Using genome-scale analyses of germline tissue, we show that common germline-expressed genes are activated by MES-4 and repressed by DRM, and that MES-4 and DRM co-bind many germline-expressed genes. Reciprocally, MES-4 represses and DRM activates a set of autosomal soma-expressed genes and overall X-chromosome gene expression. Mutations in mes-4 or the DRM subunit lin-54 oppositely skew target transcript levels and cause sterility; a double mutant restores near wild-type transcript levels and germ cell development. Together, “yin-yang” regulation by MES-4 and DRM ensures transcript levels appropriate for germ cell function, elicits robust but not excessive dampening of X-chromosome-wide transcription, and may poise genes for future expression changes. Our study reveals that conserved transcriptional regulators implicated in development and cancer counteract each other to fine-tune transcript dosage.

DESIGN
We compared germline gene expression profile of  wild-type N2 C. elegans, lin-54(n3423) M+Z- mutant, mes-4(ok2326) M+Z- mutant, and lin-54(n3423);mes-4(ok2326) M+Z-mutant grown at 20C.  50~70 Germlines were dissected from young adults (24hours after L4 stage), and region from the tip until late pachytene stage of meiosis were collected. Three biological replicates for each strain were performed.

PLATFORM
GPL200 [Celegans] Affymetrix C. elegans Genome Array

CITATIONS
24281426

