TITLE
Microbial Biogeography Across a Full-Scale Wastewater Treatment Plant Transect: Evidence for Immigration Between Coupled Processes

ORGANISM
uncultured bacterium ; uncultured archaeon

SUMMARY
Wastewater treatment plants use a variety of bioreactor types and configurations to remove organic matter and nutrients.  Little is known regarding the effects of different configurations and within-plant immigration on microbial community dynamics.  Previously, we found that the structure of ammonia-oxidizing bacterial (AOB) communities in a full-scale dispersed growth activated sludge bioreactor correlated strongly with levels of NO2- entering the reactor from an upstream trickling filter (Wells et al 2009).   Here, to further examine this puzzling association, we profile within-plant microbial biogeography (spatial variation) and test the hypothesis that substantial microbial immigration occurs along a transect (raw influent, trickling filter biofilm, trickling filter effluent, and activated sludge) at the same full-scale wastewater treatment plant. AOB amoA gene abundance increased > 30-fold between influent and trickling filter effluent concomitant with NO2- production, indicating unexpected growth and activity of AOB within the trickling filter. Nitrosomonas europaea was the dominant AOB phylotype in trickling filter biofilm and effluent, while a distinct ‘Nitrosomonas-like’ lineage dominated in activated sludge.  Prior time series indicated that this ‘Nitrosomonas-like’ lineage was dominant when NO2- levels in the trickling filter effluent (i.e., activated sludge influent) were low, while N. europaea became dominant in the activated sludge when NO2- levels were high.  This is consistent with the hypothesis that NO2- production may co-occur with biofilm sloughing, releasing N. europaea from the trickling filter into the activated sludge bioreactor. Phylogenetic microarray (PhyloChip) analyses revealed significant spatial variation in taxonomic diversity, including a large excess of methanogens in the trickling filter relative to activated sludge and attenuation of Enterobacteriaceae across the transect, and demonstrated transport of a highly diverse microbial community via the trickling filter effluent to the activated sludge bioreactor.  Our results provide compelling evidence that substantial immigration between coupled process units occurs and may exert significant influence over microbial community dynamics within staged bioreactors.

DESIGN
Samples described in this study were obtained at the Palo Alto Regional Water Quality Control Plant (PARWQCP) in Palo Alto, CA on 12 November 2008.  Sampling along a transect within the PARWQCP occurred on 12 November 2008.  Upon temporary shutdown of the rotating distributor arm in one of the trickling filters, a surface PVC media module (0.9 m deep) was removed from the reactor, and 1-3 g biofilm samples were obtained with a sterile spatula, placed in sterile 1.5 ml tubes, weighed, and stored at -20oC.  Concurrently, samples of influent, trickling filter effluent, and activated sludge were obtained.  Activated sludge samples represented a 24-h composite from the combined outlet of all four aeration basins using a Sigma 900 refrigerated automatic sampler (Hach, Loveland, CO). Eight 1.5 ml activated sludge samples were centrifuged onsite for 5 min at 5000 g, decanted, and stored at -20oC.  Raw influent and trickling filter effluent samples were transported on ice to the laboratory, vacuum filtered in 10 ml aliquots onto 0.22 μm Hydrophilic Durapore PVDF filters (25 mm diameter, Millipore, Billerica, MA), and archived at -20oC.  PhyloChip analyses were performed on biological triplicate samples from trickling filter biofilm, trickling filter effluent, and activated sludge, and biological duplicate samples (due to biomass limitations) from the plant influent.

PLATFORM
GPL15537 [PhyloChip] Affymetrix G2 PhyloChip

CITATIONS
24553968

