TITLE
Aberrant methylation of gene associated CpG sites occurs in borderline personality disorder

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is a complex psychiatric disease with an increased impact in the last years. While the diagnosis and therapy are well established, little is known on the pathogenesis of borderline personality disorder. Previously, a significant increase in DNA methylation of relevant neuropsychiatric genes in BPD patients has been reported. In our study we performed genome wide methylation analysis and revealed specific CpG sites that exhibited increased methylation in 26 BPD patients compared to 11 healthy controls. Bead chip technology and quantitative bisulfite pyrosequencing showed a significantly increased methylation at CpG sites of APBA2 (1.1 fold) and APBA3 (1.1 fold), KCNQ1 (1.6 fold), MCF2 (1.1 fold) and NINJ2 (1.2 fold) in BPD patients. For the CpG sites of GATA4 an increase in DNA methylation was observed, but was only significant in the bead chip assay. Moreover genome wide methylation levels of blood samples of BPD patients and control samples are similar. In summary, our results show a significant 1.26 fold average increase in methylation at the analyzed gene associated CpG sites in the blood of BPD patients compared to controls samples (p < 0.001). This data may provide new insights into epigenetic mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of BPD.

DESIGN
Whole blood samples for 26 BPD patients and 11 controls were obtained from the Psychiatric Hospital in Münsterlingen, Switzerland. All patients signed informed consent at initial clinical investigation. The study was approved by the local ethic committee. Diagnosis of BPD was established by an experienced psychiatrist (Dr. G. W. Dammann). Clincopathological parameter of the patients and controls are summarized in table S1 (for details see (Dammann et al, 2011)). Genomic DNA from whole blood was isolated by Nucleo Spin XL Blood (Macherey and Nagel, Düren, Germany). For the bead chip array 500 ng of genomic DNA was treated with bisulfite (Dammann et al, 2011).

PLATFORM
GPL8490 Illumina HumanMethylation27 BeadChip (HumanMethylation27_270596_v.1.2)

CITATIONS
24367640

