TITLE
hSETD1A cooperates with beta-catenin to regulate Wnt target genes and control colorectal tumor growth

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most prevalent type of adult brain tumor, and one of the deadliest tumors known to mankind. The genetic understanding of GBM is, however, limited, and the molecular mechanisms which facilitate GBM cell survival and growth within the tumor microenvironment are largely unknown. We applied digital karyotyping and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays to screen for copy number changes in GBM samples and found that the most frequently amplified region is at chromosome 7p11.2. The high resolution of digital karyotyping and SNP arrays permits the precise delineation of amplicon boundaries and has enabled identification of the minimal region of amplification at 7p11.2, which contains two genes, EGFR and SEC61γ. SEC61γ encodes a subunit of a heterotrimeric protein channel located in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In addition to its high frequency of gene amplification in GBMs, SEC61γ is also remarkably overexpressed in 77% of GBMs, but not in lower-grade gliomas. The siRNA-mediated knockdown of SEC61γ expression in tumor cells led to growth suppression and apoptosis. Furthermore, we showed that pharmacological ER stress agents induce SEC61γ expression in GBM cells. Together, these results indicate that aberrant expression of SEC61γ serves significant roles in GBM cell survival, likely via a mechanism that is involved in the cytoprotective ER stress-adaptive response to the tumor microenvironment.

DESIGN
hSETD1A was silenced in HCT116 cells using retrovirus harboring shRNA specifically against the hSETD1A gene.  10μg RNA was reverse transcribed to cDNA using the Applied Biosystems High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). cDNA products were treated with 100ng RNaseA and then purified using the Qiagen PCR purification kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. NimbleGen Human Gene Expression array was purchased from Roche Applied Sciences. cDNA samples were labeled, Cy3 hybridized, and processed at the FSU NimbleGen Microarray Facility at Florida State University.

PLATFORM
GPL15491 NimbleGen Human Gene Expression 12x135K Array [2007-09-12_HG18_opt_expr, 070925_HG18_expr]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

