TITLE
Gene expression profiles of hepatic stellate cells isolated from Pdgfrb-knockout mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background & Aims: Rapid induction of beta-PDGF receptor (beta-PDGFR) is a core feature of hepatic stellate cell activation, the hallmark of liver fibrogenesis. However, biological consequences of the induction are not well characterized. We aimed to determine the involvement of beta-PDGFR-mediated molecular pathway activation on hepatic stellate cells in liver injury, fibrogenesis, and carcinogenesis in vivo.   Methods: Loss and constitutive activation of beta-PDGFR were assessed in mouse models with either a stellate cell-specific beta-PDGFR knockout or the expression of an autoactivating mutation respectively. Liver injury and fibrosis were induced in two mechanistically distinct models: carbontetrachloride (CCl4) treatment and ligation of the common bile duct. Hepatocarcinogenesis with underlying liver injury/fibrosis was assessed by a single dose of diethylnitrosamine (DEN) followed by repeated injections of CCl4. Genome-wide expression profiling was performed isolated stellate cells from these models to determine deregulated pathways.  Results: Depletion of beta-PDGFR in hepatic stellate cells led to decreased histological liver injury, serum transaminases, collagen alpha 1(I) and alpha smooth muscle actin expression, and collagen deposition. Stellate cell proliferation was significantly reduced after acute hepatic injury in vivo. In contrast, autoactivation of beta-PDGFR in stellate cells accelerated liver fibrosis, most prominently after 6 weeks of CCl4 induced injury. There was no difference in development of DEN-induced pre-neoplastic loci according to the status of beta-PDGFR.   Conclusions: Depletion of beta-PDGFR in hepatic stellate cells attenuated the development of liver injury, fibrosis, and stellate cell proliferation in multiple animal models, whereas the constitutive activation of beta-PDGFR enhanced fibrosis. However, manipulation of beta-PDGFR alone did not reduce development of dysplastic nodules. These findings indicate that titration of receptor beta-PDGFR expression on stellate cells parallels fibrosis and injury, but may not impact the development of hepatic neoplasia alone.

DESIGN
Hepatic stellate cells were isolated from liver of beta-PDGFR-wild-type or knockout mice, and treated with beta-PDGF ligand or vehicle control.

PLATFORM
GPL6887 Illumina MouseWG-6 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
25678385

