TITLE
Basal-like Breast Cancer Cells Induce Phenotypic and Genomic Changes in Macrophages

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Basal-like breast cancer (BBC) is an aggressive subtype of breast cancer that has no biologically targeted therapy. The interactions of BBCs with stromal cells are important determinants of tumor biology, with inflammatory cells playing well-recognized roles in cancer progression. Despite the fact that macrophage–BBC communication is bidirectional, important questions remain about how BBCs affect adjacent immune cells. This study investigated monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation and polarization and gene expression in response to coculture with basal like versus luminal breast cancer cells. Changes induced by coculture were compared with changes observed under classical differentiation and polarization conditions. Monocytes (THP-1 cells) exposed to BBC cells in coculture had altered gene expression with upregulation of both M1 and M2 macrophage markers. Two sets of M1 and M2 markers were selected from the PCR profiles and used for dual immunofluorescent staining of BBC versus luminal cocultured THP-1s, and cancer-adjacent, benign tissue sections from patients diagnosed with BBCs or luminal breast cancer, confirming the differential expression patterns. Relative to luminal breast cancers, BBCs also increased differentiation of monocytes to macrophages and stimulated macrophage migration. Consistent with these changes in cellular phenotype, a distinct pattern of cytokine secretion was evident in macrophage–BBC cocultures, including upregulation of NAP-2, osteoprotegerin, MIG, MCP-1, MCP-3, and interleukin (IL)-1b. Application of IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA) to cocultures attenuated BBC-induced macrophage migration. These data contribute to an understanding of the BBC-mediated activation of the stromal immune response, implicating specific cytokines that are differentially expressed in basal-like microenvironments and suggesting plausible targets for modulating immune responses to BBCs.Introduction: Overall survival of early-stage breast cancer (BC) patients is similar for those who undergo breast conserving therapy (BCT) and mastectomy, however, 10-15% of women undergoing BCT suffer ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence. The risk of recurrence may vary with age or breast cancer subtype. Understanding the gene expression of the cancer-adjacent tissue and/or stromal response to specific tumor subtypes is important for developing clinical strategies to reduce recurrence risk. Methods: We studied gene expression data in cancer-adjacent tissue from 158 BC patients. Complementary in vitro cocultures were used to study cell-cell communication between fibroblasts and specific breast cancer subtypes. Results: Our results suggest that intrinsic tumor subtypes are reflected in histologically normal cancer-adjacent tissue. Gene expression of cancer-adjacent tissues shows that triple negative (Claudin-low or Basal-like tumors) exhibit increased expression of genes involved in inflammation and immune response. While such changes could reflect distinct immune populations present in the microenvironment of different breast cancer subtypes, altered immune response gene expression was also observed in cocultures in the absence of immune cell infiltrates, emphasizing that these inflammatory mediators are secreted by breast-specific cells. In addition, while triple negative BCs are associated with upregulated immune response genes, Luminal breast cancers are more commonly associated with estrogen-response in adjacent tissues. Conclusions: Specific characteristics of BCs are reflected in the surrounding benign tissue. This commonality between tumor and surrounding tissue may underlie second primaries and local recurrences. Biomarkers derived from cancer-adjacent tissue may be helpful in defining personalized surgical strategies or in predicting recurrence risk.

DESIGN
reference x sample

PLATFORM
GPL4133 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

