TITLE
Temperature-related gene expression reaction norms in brown trout

ORGANISM
Salmo trutta

SUMMARY
Local adaptation and its underlying molecular basis has long been a key focus in evolutionary biology. There has recently been increased interest in the evolutionary role of plasticity and the molecular mechanisms underlying local adaptation. Using transcriptome analysis, we assessed differences in gene expression profiles for three brown trout (Salmo trutta) populations, one resident and two anadromous, experiencing different temperature regimes in the wild. The study was based on an F2 generation raised in a common garden setting. A previous study of the F1 generation revealed different reaction norms and significantly higher QST than FST among populations for two early life-history traits. In the present study we investigated if similar reaction norm patterns were present at the transcriptome level. Eggs from the three populations were incubated at two temperatures (5 and 8 degrees C) representing conditions encountered in the local environments. Global gene expression for fry at the stage of first feeding was analysed using a 32k cDNA microarray. The results revealed differences in gene expression between populations and temperatures and population × temperature interactions, the latter indicating locally adapted reaction norms. Moreover, the reaction norms paralleled those observed previously at early life-history traits. We were able to identify 90 cDNA clones among the genes with an interaction effect that were differently expressed between the ecologically divergent populations. These included genes involved in immune- and stress response. We observed less plasticity in the resident as compared to the anadromous populations, possibly reflecting that the degree of environmental heterogeneity encountered by individuals throughout their life cycle will select for variable level of phenotypic plasticity at the transcriptome level. Our study demonstrates the usefulness of transcriptome approaches to identify genes with different temperature reaction norms. The responses observed suggest that populations may vary in their susceptibility to climate change.

DESIGN
Brown trout populations from three rivers in Denmark were studied: the Karup (KAR), Norring Moellebaek (NOR) and Lilleaa Rivers (LIL). These rivers experience different temperature regimes during the period lasting from egg incubation until fry emergence. During the autumn of 2004 and the winter of 2004/2005, adults from the three populations were collected by electro fishing. The fish were stripped for milt and eggs to establish an F1 generation. In autumn/winter 2008/2009, mature F1s were used to establish F2 offspring for each of the three populations. For KAR and LIL, 20 full-sib families were established, whereas for NOR, 15 full-sib families were established. Eggs from each full sib family were divided into two pools that were incubated at 5 and 8¡C in separate hatching troughs. At the time of first feeding (ca. 750-780 day-degrees), 10 individuals from each family and temperature were collected and transferred to separate tubes containing RNAlater (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). A 32K cDNA microarray developed for salmonids by cGRASP was used for the analyses. Ten families were randomly selected from each population. From each family two individuals were analyzed for each temperature (5 and 8oC, respectively), amounting to a total of 120 individuals. Of the two individuals from each temperature treatment within a family, one was labeled with CY5 and the other with CY3. For each family there were two comparisons of individuals representing different temperatures, but with dyes swapped between comparisons.

PLATFORM
GPL13225 cGRASP Salmonid array, 32K cDNA, version 2, 02/08

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

