TITLE
Effects of egg enrichment with glucocorticoid hormone, antagonist and receptor messenger in the modulation of gene expression in zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos

ORGANISM
Danio rerio

SUMMARY
Several studies have shown the presence of large reservoirs of maternally contributed liposoluble hormones in the yolk of mature teleost oocytes, such as steroid, thyroid and retinoid hormones, as found in other oviparous vertebrates. This supports the idea that maternal hormones could play a major role in regulating developmental processes post-fertilization. The aims of this study were: A) to verify whether a cortisol treatment of zebrafish eggs affects the growth rate of the progenies as compared to controls in F1-F4 treated generations (ontogenetic programming). It was to be established whether: 1) this is due to a short-term effect of maternal cortisol, directly producing an initial growth retard that is not compensated later on in lifetime (short-term epigenetic effect); or 2) this is due to a long-term priming of growth rate by maternal cortisol that persists later on in lifetime (long-term epigenetic effect); B) to verify whether the ontogenetic programming is inheritable, being transmitted also to the untreated F4 generation. It was to be established whether the programmed genes are developmental and/or growth genes that are inhibited, or genes encoding hormones of the corticoid stress axis (hypothalamo-hypophyso-interrenal axis) that are amplified, or both gene clusters.

DESIGN
Control embryos (treated with the vehicle ethanol only) were compared to cortisol-treated embryos at 5 hpf, 12 hpf and 24 hpf. Four replicates were performed for the 5 hpf samples, three biological replicates were carried out for the 12 hpf samples, and a single experiment was performed for the 24 hpf samples.

PLATFORM
GPL7301 Agilent-019161 D. rerio (Zebrafish) Oligo Microarray (V2) G2519F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

