TITLE
Global Analysis of Thyroid Receptor Binding Sites Reveals Interaction with the Ddx54 and Thrsp Promoter in Juvenile Mouse Liver

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Thyroid hormones (THs) play a critical role in development and throughout adulthood. THs act through the thyroid receptor (TR), which binds to the TH response element (TRE) to regulate the expression of target genes. Although TH action has been studied for decades, surprisingly few TREs have been well validated and characterized. In this study we used chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by microarray analysis (ChIP-chip) to identify TR-binding sites in juvenile (postnatal day 15) mice liver. Microarray analysis revealed twelve TR-binding sites consistent between all analyzed samples. In silico analysis was carried out to search for moderately conserved classic TRE sequences within these novel binding regions, which led to the identification of six candidate TREs within three binding regions. Luciferase reporter assays confirmed the presence of a TRE in the promoter region of DEAD (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp) box polypeptide 54 (Ddx54) and thyroid hormone responsive SPOT14 (Thrsp). The TR/retinoid X receptor (RXR) heterodimer and RXR homodiner were shown to bind the promoter region of Ddx54 and drive gene expression in the presence of 9-cis-retinoic acid (9cRA). The promoter region of Thrsp was shown to allow binding of the TR/RXR heterodimer, and both T3 and 9cRA were able to significantly increase luciferase activity. The RXR homodimer was also able to bind the response element in the promoter region of Thrsp and increase luciferase activity. Overall, ChIP-chip analysis revealed a relatively limited number of TR-binding sites in juvenile mouse liver despite previous studies showing that numerous genes can be affected by TH disruption at that developmental stage, suggesting that TH action may also be mediated through other intermediates. Collectively the results provide an important step towards characterizing TR-binding sites and identifying the underlying drivers of TR-gene regulation.

DESIGN
Three samples were analyzed (total input and immunoprecipitated for each samples).

PLATFORM
GPL16743 Agilent-028383 SurePrint G3 Mouse Promoter Microarray 1x1M

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

