TITLE
Role of HCV-induced immune responses on the establishment of operational tolerance following liver transplantation in humans

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Immune responses induced by ongoing and/or past infections prevent the establishment of transplantation tolerance in experimental animal models. How host-pathogen interactions influence allograft tolerance in humans has not been investigated before. The spontaneous development of operational tolerance in liver transplant recipients with chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection constitutes a unique setting to address this question. We conducted a clinical trial of immunosuppression withdrawal in stable HCV-infected liver recipients to elucidate: i) the mechanisms through which allograft tolerance is established in the presence of an ongoing inflammatory response; and ii) how is influenced by anti-HCV heterologous immune responses. Enrolled patients gradually discontinued their immunosuppressive drugs over 6-9 months, and those who maintained normal allograft status 12 months after drug withdrawal were considered operationally tolerant. Successful drug withdrawal was associated with intra-hepatic over-expression of type I interferon and immune-regulatory genes, and correlated with an expansion of exhausted PD1/CTLA4/2B4-positive HCV-specific circulating CD8+ T cells. These findings were already present before immunosuppression was discontinued and were specific for HCV infection. In contrast, the magnitude of HCV-induced inflammatory gene expression and the scope of anti-HCV effector T cell responses did not influence drug withdrawal outcome. Our data indicate that in humans persistent viral infections do not necessarily preclude the development of transplantation tolerance. At least in HCV-infected liver allografts, mechanisms associated with the capacity of the virus to evade adaptive immunity could contribute to the restraining of alloimmune responses and the establishment of transplantation tolerance.

DESIGN
Transcriptomic study from the following liver tissue samples: 12 tolerant before immunosuppression (IS), 13 non-tolerant before IS, 4 from non-tolerant at the time of rejection, 13 from tolerant patients 12 months after IS discontinuation. Additionally, 8 liver tissue samples obtained from healthy living liver donors undergoing partial hepatectomy were included as non-transplanted controls.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
24964989

