TITLE
Comparative analysis of transcriptome profiles of G. arboreum L. cv. and its fuzzy-lintless mutant (ANOI 1960) during fibre development stages.

ORGANISM
Gossypium arboreum

SUMMARY
Comparative analysis of transcriptome profiles of G. arboreum L. cv. and its fuzzy-lintless mutant (ANOI 1960) at 0 and 10 dpa. Cotton is one of the most commercially important fibre crops in the world and used as a source for natural textile fibre and cottonseed oil. The fuzzy-lintless ovules of cotton mutants are ideal source for identifying genes involved in fibre development by comparing with fibre bearing ovules of wild-type. To decipher molecular mechanisms involved in fibre cell development, transcriptome analysis has been carried out by comparing G. arboreum cv. (wild-type) with its fuzzy-lintless mutant (ANOI 1960). Fuzzed-lintless mutant line was generated by back cross breeding between FL and Fl (recurrent parent) lines (personal communication by Dr. I. S. Katageri). Basically Fibre less type was a RIL, first recovered from cross between G.arboreum (linted) and G. anomalum (lint less). This RIL was used as donor parent and crossed with normal arboreum (as recurrent parent) to develop G. arboreum FL and G. arboreum Fl isogenic lines. This G. arboreum Fl line is named as ANOI 1960. Cotton bolls were collected at fibre initiation (0 dpa/days post anthesis) and elongation (10 dpa) and gene expression profiles were analyzed in wild-type and ANOI 1960 mutant using Affymetrix cotton GeneChip Genome array.

DESIGN
Cotton plants were grown under field condition. Flowers were tagged and cotton bolls were collected during fibre development stages. Total RNA was isolated from fibre bearing ovules of wild-type (WT) and fuzzy-lintless ovules of mutant (ANOI 1960) collected at various (0 and 10 dpa) fibre development stages using SpectrumTM Plant Total RNA kit (Sigma, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Affymetrix cotton GeneChip Genome array (Affymetrix, USA) having 23,977 probe sets representing 21,854 cotton transcripts was used for transcriptome analysis. Three biological replicates were maintained to test the reproducibility and quality of the chip hybridization. cDNA labeling, array hybridization, staining and washing procedures were carried out as described in the Affymetrix protocols. CEL files having estimated probe intensity values were analyzed with GeneSpring GX-11.5 software (Agilent Technologies, USA) to get differentially expressed transcripts. The Robust Multiarray Average (RMA) algorithm was used for the back ground correction, quantile normalization and median polished probe set summarization to generate single expression value for each probe set. Normalized expression values were log2-transformed and differential expression analysis was performed using unpaired t-test. The p-values were corrected by applying the false discovery rate (FDR) correction (Benjamini and Hochberg, 2000).

PLATFORM
GPL8672 [Cotton] Affymetrix Cotton Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

