TITLE
835np mutant vs wild-type

ORGANISM
Streptococcus mutans

SUMMARY
Transcriptional profiling of the Δ835np mutant vs the wild-type strain grown in BHI to OD600=0.5. An intimate linkage between the regulation of biofilm formation, stress tolerance and genetic competence exists in the dental caries pathogen Streptococcus mutans. We previously reported that the rcrRPQ genes, which encode ABC exporters (RcrPQ) and a MarR-family transcriptional regulator (RcrR) that represses the expression of the rcr operon, play a dominant role in regulation of development of genetic competence and connect competence with stress tolerance and (p)ppGpp production in S. mutans. Here we identify the region required for efficient RcrR binding to the rcr promoter region using purified recombinant RcrR (rRcrR) protein in electrophoretic mobility shift and fluorescence polarization assays. DNA fragments carrying mutations in the binding region resulted in decreased binding of rRcrR. Direct binding of RcrR to the comX gene promoter in vitro revealed that RcrR has the potential to directly regulate competence development. Likewise, direct interactions of rRcrR with the promoter region of relP, encoding a (p)ppGpp synthase, show the potential for RcrR-dependent modulation of (p)ppGpp pools. Introduction of mutations into the RcrR binding sites in the rcrR promoter region in vivo demonstrated that optimal RcrR binding is essential for proper expression of competence genes and optimal transformation efficiency. Transcription profiling by RNA-seq and mircroarrays of strains with mutations in rcrR showed that genes in the competence pathway were those most differentially expressed. Thus, here and in a accompanying paper, we establish mechanisms by which the products of the rcrRPQ operon integrate com gene expression, genetic transformation, ppGpp metabolism and stress tolerance in S. mutans

DESIGN
Two-condition experiment, Δ835np mutant vs the wild-type strain. Biological replicates: 4 per strain, independently grown and harvested. One replicate per array

PLATFORM
GPL15711 JCVI PFGRC Streptococcus mutans 13K v3 array designed primarily based on strain UA159 [ORF version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

