TITLE
Transcript and metabolite analysis of Vitis vinifera cv. Trincadeira berries infected with Botrytis cinerea reveals an activation of a non-sustained plant defense response

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
Vitis vinifera berries are sensitive towards infection by the necrothopic pathogen Botrytis cinerea leading to important economic losses worldwide. The combined analysis of the transcriptome and metabolome associated with the infection has not been previously performed in grapes or in another fleshy fruit. In an attempt to identify the molecular and metabolic mechanisms associated with the infection, pepper- corn size fruits (EL 29) were infected in-field and green berries (EL 33) and veraison berries (EL 35) were collected for microarray analysis complemented with metabolic profiling using GC-EI-TOF/MS and headspace GC-EI-MS platforms. The results provide evidence of a reprogramming of carbohydrate and lipid metabolisms towards increased synthesis of secondary metabolites involved in plant defense such as trans-resveratrol and gallic acid. The response is mainly activated in green berries with the putative involvement of jasmonic acid, ethylene, polyamines and auxins whereas salicylic acid does not seem to be involved. At veraison, however, genes encoding protein kinases, MYB and WRKY transcription factors, pathogenesis-related proteins, glutathione S-transferase, stilbene synthase and phenylalanine ammonia-lyase are no longer up-regulated or even down-regulated suggesting that the basal defense response is not active with the onset of ripening. This non-sustained defense response has not been previously reported for necrotrophic, biotrophic, or hemibiotrophic pathogens, and highlights the importance of conducting studies in fruits and not solely in vegetative tissues. Furthermore, this study provided with metabolic biomarkers of infection namely azelaic acid, arabitol and gluconic acid that can be used to monitor infection early in the vineyard.

DESIGN
2 time points in 2011 season at EL 33 and EL 35. 3 biological replicates. Grapes Infected with Botrytis cinerea and control with phosphate buffer

PLATFORM
GPL17894 NimbleGen 090918 Vitus vinifera exp HX12 [090918_Vitus_exp; GENE_CALL_ID version]

CITATIONS
25675955

