TITLE
microRNA-27a contributes to rhabdomyosarcoma cell proliferation through suppression of RARA and RXRA

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
This SuperSeries is composed of the SubSeries listed below. Background: Rhabdomyosarcomas (RMS) are rare but very aggressive tumors of childhood that arise as a consequence of regulatory distruption of the growth and differentiation pathways of myogenic precursor cells. Based on morphology, two major RMS subtypes can be identified: embryonal RMS (ERMS) and alveolar (ARMS). So, it is essential to unravel the molecular mechanisms involved in cancer pathogenesis and in disease progression. MicroRNAs are endogenous small non-coding RNAs with a key role in tumorigenesis. Methodology/Principal Findings: To better understand the involvement of miRNAs in RMS, we analyzed the expression profile of 8 different RMS cell lines (4 ARMS and 4 ERMS). The miRNA population from each cell line was compared to a reference sample consisting of a pool of each total RNA sample mixed in equal amount. We identified a 16 miRNAs signature that discriminates translocation positive (ARMS) and negative RMS (ERMS). We focused our attention on the role of miR-27a that is up-regulated in the more aggressive RMS cell lines (ARMS translocation positive) where probably it acts as an oncogene. miR-27a-overexpressing cells showed a significant enhance of the proliferation rate, paralleled by a decrease of cells in G1 phase. We demonstrated that miR-27a is implicated in cell cycle control by targeting the retinoic acid alpha receptor (RARA) and retinoic X receptor alpha (RXRA). Conclusions: Our results demonstrated the potential of miRNA expression signature to better classify different RMS subtypes and settled the basis for a potential therapeutic role of miR-27a in RMS through modulation of retinoic acid receptors expression.

DESIGN
Refer to individual Series

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version) GPL17835 Micro-CRIBI microRNA Platform (mirVana Probe Set V1, Ambion)

CITATIONS
25915942

