TITLE
Nuclear factor kappa B activation-induced anti-apoptosis renders HER2 positive cells drug resistant and accelerates tumor growth

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Breast cancers with HER2 overexpression are sensitive to drugs targeting the receptor or its kinase activity. HER2-targeting drugs are initially effective against HER2- positive breast cancer, but resistance inevitably occurs. We previously found that nuclear factor kappa B is hyper-activated in the subset of HER-2 positive breast cancer cells and tissue specimens. In this study, we report that constitutively active NF-κB rendered HER2-positive cancer cells resistant to anti-HER2 drugs, and cells selected for Lapatinib resistance up-regulated NF-κB. In both circumstances, cells were anti-apoptotic and grew rapidly as xenografts. Lapatinib-resistant cells were refractory to HER2 and NF-κB inhibitors alone but were sensitive to their combination, suggesting a novel therapeutic strategy. A subset of NF-κB-responsive genes was overexpressed in HER2-positive and triple-negative breast cancers, and patients with this NF-κB signature had poor clinical outcome. Anti-HER2 drug resistance may be a consequence of NF-κB activation, and selection for resistance results in NF-κB activation, suggesting this transcription factor is central to oncogenesis and drug resistance. Clinically, the combined targeting of HER2 and NF-κB suggests a potential treatment paradigm for patients who relapse after anti-HER2 therapy. Patients with these cancers may be treated by simultaneously suppressing HER2 signaling and NF-κB activation. We used microarrays to detail the gene expression differences underlying the characterictic survival differences between the SKR6, SKR6-Vector, SKR6CA, and SKR6LR cell lines, which are defined as follows: SKR6: A clonal derivative of SKBR3 cells isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) to enrich for elevated HER2 levels, SKR6CA: SKR6 cells retrovirally transduced with constitutively active NF-κB relA/p65 (CAp65) and selected with puromycin, SKR6 vector: SKR6 cells transduced with the pQCXIP empty retroviral vector and selected with puromycin, and SKR6LR: SKR6 cells treated with increasing lapatinib concentrations (0.2 to 5 μM) for several months.

DESIGN
We sorted SKBR-3 cells by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) to enriched for  cell population with elevated HER2 expression, which we termed SKR6. The following cell lines were then created from SKR6 cells: SKR6CA: SKR6 cells retrovirally transduced with constitutively active NF-κB relA/p65 (CAp65), SKR6 vector: SKR6 cells transduced with the pQCXIP empty retroviral vector and selected with puromycin, and SKR6LR: SKR6 cells treated with increasing lapatinib concentrations (0.2 to 5 μM) for several months.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
24319068

