TITLE
Transcriptomic analysis of neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells in response to stable over-expression of histone H2A type 2-B

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid malignancy derived from neural crest cells. Better elucidation of the mechanisms underlying the aggressive progression of neuroblastoma is needed for improving the therapeutic efficiencies. Since previous studies indicate that histone H2A type 2-B (H2AB), a histone H2A variant locating at chromosome 1q21.2 region, is up-regulated in neural progenitor cells and early motor neurons, we hypothesized that H2AB might participate in the progression of neuroblastoma. We employed the human whole genome microarray expression profiling as a discovery platform to analyze the transcriptome profiling changes of human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells in response to stable over-expression of H2AB. The results showed that stable over-expression of H2AB led to altered expression of 514 human mRNAs, including 249 up-regulated genes and 265 down-regulated genes. Then we found the possible roles of these differentially regulated mRNAs in selected pathways including cell cycle/proliferation, apoptosis, and cytokine/chemokine responses by Bioinformatic analysis. Furthermore, we validated the microarray results by real-time RT-PCR with high identity. Overall, our results provided fundamental information about the transcriptomic changes in response to H2AB over-expression in human neuroblastoma cells, and these findings will help us to understand the pathogenesis of neuroblastoma.

DESIGN
Total RNA of cells stably transfected with empty vector or H2AB was extracted using the TRIZOL Reagent according to the manufacturer's instructions. Gene expression profiling was performed for each RNA sample separately on the Agilent Whole Human Genome Oligo Microarray 4×44K at Shanghai Technology Corporation (Shanghai, China), in which GeneChip microarray service was certificated by Agilent.

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

