TITLE
Immunoregulatory function of placental dendritic cells: tolerance against intracellular bacteria

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The role of placental dendritic cells (plaDCs) is largely unknown. These cells were isolated using CD14-, CD11c+ selection. PlaDCs, exhibited similar morphology as monocyte-derived DCs (moDCs), and several DCs markers such as DC-SIGN, BDCA-1, ASGPR and Dectin-1. They also express HLA-G and ILT4 two molecules involved in tolerance maintain during pregnancy. At the transcriptomic level, plaDCs showed reduced expression of class II MHC and costimulatory moecules genes, while that of Toll like receptors and MHC class I were increased. PlaDCs also showed an important gene signature dependant on hormon influence. Indeed, Estrogen and Progesterone regulated genes were uprelated in plaDCs compared to moDCs. For example, CSH1 (prolactin), was highly upregulated in plaDCs and was also produced at the protein level, which was not the case in moDCs. PlaDCs remained weakly activable, as TLR agonist such as LPS and peptidoglycan were not able to induce membranous expression of CD80, CD83, CD786 and HLA-DR contrary to moDCs. Strinckinglky, plaDCs were able to produce spontaneously high levels of IL-10, but not IL-6 or IL-12p70, even after stimulation. This was also observable, when plaDCs were infected with bacterial pathigens with placenta tropism, namely C. burnetii and B. abortus, which were not able to induce maturation. However, these pathogens were able to enter plaDCs and to survive in them. These result suggest that plaDCs are rather immunomodulatory cells that participate to the maintaining of tolerance for the fetus during pregnancy.

DESIGN
Placental DCs were isolated from at term placenta and RNA was extracted. moDCs were obtained by harvesting monocyte during 7 days with IL-4+GM-CSF cocktail and their RNA was extracted. The transcriptome of plaDCs was compared to the transcriptome of moDCs.

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
25566514

