TITLE
Early pre-symptomatic and progressive signatures of non-coding RNAs in ALS patients and mutation carriers

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Knowledge about the nature and timepoint of pathomolecular alterations preceding onset of symptoms in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is largely lacking. It could not only pave the way for valuable therapeutic targets but might also govern future concepts of pre-manifest disease modifying treatments. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are central regulators of transcriptome plasticity and participate in pathogenic cascades and/or mirror cellular adaptation to insults. We obtained expression profiles of miRNAs as well as other non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) in the serum of sporadic ALS patients (sALS), familial ALS cases (fALS), asymptomatic mutation carriers and healthy controls. We observed a strikingly homogenous ncRNA profile in fALS patients that, to a large extend, was independent to the underlying disease gene and different to heterogeneous ncRNA signatures in sALS patients. Moreover, we identified 68 significantly dysregulated ncRNAs in pre-manifest ALS mutation carriers, more than 20 years before the estimated time window of disease onset. 91% of ncRNA alterations in mutation carriers overlapped with the fALS patients revealing progressive changes towards and during the disease. Our data thus demonstrate a high epigenetic heterogeneity amongst sALS patients and suggest common denominators regarding molecular pathogenesis of different ALS genes. We describe the earliest pathomolecular alterations in ALS known to date, which provide a basis for the development of predictors of disease onset as well as the discovery of novel therapeutic targets and strongly argue for studies evaluating pre-symptomatic disease-modifying treatment in ALS.

DESIGN
Serum ncRNA pofiles of sporadic and familiar ALS patients as well as asymptomatic ALS mutation carriers were compared to age and gender matched healthy controls using a total of 53 Affymetrix miRNA 3.0 arrays. In detail, a total of 9 fALS patients (analyzed in 6 arrays) were compared to 10 controls, a total of 18 ALS mutation carriers (analyzed in 12 arrays) were compared to 8 controls and 18 sALS patients were compared to 16 controls.

PLATFORM
GPL16384 [miRNA-3] Affymetrix Multispecies miRNA-3 Array

CITATIONS
25193138

