TITLE
Transcriptome Profiling of Lgr5-expressing ovarian surface epithelium cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Transcriptome profiling using Affymetrix GeneChip arrays was performed on sorted populations of Lgr5-expressing mouse ovarian surface epithelium. The ovary surface epithelium (OSE) undergoes ovulatory tear-and-remodelling throughout life. Resident stem cells drive such tissue homeostasis in many adult epithelia, but their existence in the ovary has yet to be definitively proven. Lgr5 marks stem cells in multiple epithelia. Here we use reporter mice and Single Molecule Florescent-in-Situ-Hybridization (FISH) to document candidate Lgr5+ stem cells within the mouse ovary and associated structures. Lgr5 is broadly expressed during ovary organogenesis, but becomes limited to the OSE in early neonate life. In adults, Lgr5 expression is predominantly restricted to proliferative regions of the OSE and fimbria- mesovarian junction. Using conditional in vivo lineage tracing we identify embryonic and early neonate Lgr5+ populations as stem/progenitor cells contributing to the development of adult OSE and granulosa cell lineages, as well as the epithelia of the mesovarian and oviduct including its distal opening, fimbria. Long-term lineage tracing reveals that adult OSE-resident Lgr5+ populations contribute to epithelial homeostasis and OSE regenerative repair in vivo. Thus, Lgr5 is a marker of stem/progenitor cells of the ovary and tubal epithelia.

DESIGN
Ovarian surface epithelium from pooled batches of Lgr5-eGFP-CreERT2 mice (n=8, per array) were sorted for cells expressing either high or low EGFP. Total RNA from three technical replicates per sorted population (Lgr5-high or Lgr5-low) was extracted with the RNeasy Micro Kit (QIAGEN), DNaseI-treated, and amplified with the Ovation Pico WTA V2 (NuGEN Technologies). Single-stranded cDNA amplification products were purified using QIAquick PCR Purification Kit (QIAGEN). cDNA was biotinylated using the Encore Biotin Module (NuGEN Technologies). Biotiylated cDNA was hybridized to Affymetrix Mouse Genechip ST 2.0 expression arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL16570 [MoGene-2_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 2.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
24997521

