TITLE
L. dorsi muscle transcriptome study in pure and crossbred young Iberian pigs

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
We studied the influence of genetic type (pure Iberian pigs vs crossbred with Duroc) on l.dorsi transcriptome Background: The two main genetic types in Iberian pig production show important phenotypic differences in growth, fattening and tissue composition since early developmental stages. The objective of this work was the evaluation of muscle transcriptome profile in young animals of both genetic types, in order to identify genes, pathways and transcription factors responsible of their phenotypic differences. Contemporary families coming from pure Iberian pigs (IB) or from crossing with Duroc boars (DUxIB) were generated. Piglets (14 from each genetic type) were sacrificed at weaning (28 days) and longissimus dorsi  muscle was sampled for composition and gene expression studies. RNA was obtained and hybridized to Affymetrix Porcine Genechip expression arrays.  Results: Loin muscle composition showed significant differences between genetic types in intramuscular fat content (6% vs. 4.2% in IB and DUxIB animals, respectively, P=0.009) and in saturated and monounsaturated fatty acid contents (P=0.019 and P=0.044, respectively). Statistical analysis of gene expression data allowed the identification of 256 differentially expressed (DE) genes between genetic types (FDR < 0.10), 102 upregulated in IB and 154 upregulated in DUxIB. The size of the effects ranged between 1.2x and 7.8x. Transcript differences were validated for a subset of DE genes by qPCR. Some candidate genes with known effects on muscle growth were found among the DE genes upregulated in DUxIB (IGF2, collagens, integrins). Genes related to lipid metabolism and proteolysis were found among the genes upregulated in IB (ME1, ELOVL6, caspases, catepsins, ubiquitination proteins). We observed alteration in biological functions related to extracellular matrix organization, cellular adhesion, muscle growth and lipid metabolism. Transcription factors (TF) potentially involved in the expression differences found were identified by calculating the regulatory impact factors (RIF). Sixteen TF were found, some of them with known relationship with muscle development (MSTN, SIX4), adipogenesis (CEBPD, PPARGC1B), or extracellular matrix processes (MAX, MXI1). Correlation among the expression of these TF and DE genes show relevant differences between genetic types.  Conclusion: The results contribute valuable information about molecular mechanisms determining the phenotypic differences of growth and meat quality between the genetic types studied, mainly related to the development and function of the extracellular matrix and also to some metabolic processes as proteolysis and lipid metabolism.

DESIGN
28 male piglets were employed. 14 animals coming for pure Iberian parents and 14 coming from the crossing of Duroc boars with Iberian sows. Animals were sacrificed at 28 d of age. At the sacrifice, longissimus dorsi muscle tissue was sampled from each animal.

PLATFORM
GPL3533 [Porcine] Affymetrix Porcine Genome Array

CITATIONS
24885501

