TITLE
Epigenetic and transcriptional aberrations in human pluripotent stem cells reflect differences in reprogramming mechanisms [RNA-Seq]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Human pluripotent stem cells hold great potential for regenerative medicine, but available cell types have important limitations. While embryonic stem cells derived from fertilized embryos (IVF-ESCs) are considered the " gold standard " of pluripotency, they are allogeneic to potential recipients. Autologous induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are prone to epigenetic and transcriptional aberrations. To determine whether accumulation of such aberrations is intrinsic to somatic cell reprogramming or secondary to the reprogramming method, we generated a genetically matched collection of human IVF-ESCs, iPSCs, and ESCs derived by somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT; NT-ESCs), and subjected them to genome-wide genetic, epigenetic and transcriptional analyses. SCNT-based reprogramming is mediated by the full complement of oocyte cytoplasmic factors, thus closely recapitulating early embryogenesis. NT-ESCs and iPSCs derived from the same somatic donor cells contained comparable numbers of de novo copy number variations (CNVs), suggesting that the two reprogramming methods may not differ significantly in mutagenic or selective pressure. On the other hand, the DNA methylation and transcriptome profiles of NT-ESCs corresponded very closely to those of IVF-ESCs, while iPSCs differed markedly from IVF-ESCs and harbored residual DNA methylation patterns typical of parental fibroblasts, suggesting incomplete reprogramming. We conclude that human somatic cells can be faithfully reprogrammed to pluripotency by SCNT and are therefore ideal candidates for cell replacement therapies.

DESIGN
Duplicate cDNA libraries of two IVF-ESCs, three sendai produced iPSC lines, two retro-virus produced iPSC lines, four NT-ESCs, and the parental fibroblast line were sequenced using Illumina HiSeq 2000. The sequence reads were mapped to hg19 reference genome and hits that passed quality filters were analyzed for differential expression.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
25008523

