TITLE
Next-generation sequencing facilitates quantitative analysis of diaphysis and metaphysis from femur of 5-week-old Dlx3Oc-cKO and wild type (WT=Dlx3+/+) mice transcriptomes

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Purpose: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) has revolutionized systems-based analysis of cellular pathways. The goals of this study are to compare NGS-derived femoral diaphysis and metaphysis transcriptome profiling (RNA-seq) to determine pathways and networks dependent on Dlx3 during bone development and homeostasis. Methods: mRNA profiles of diaphysis and metaphysis isolated from the femur of 5-week-old wild-type (WT) and Dlx3Oc-cKO (OC-cre;Dlx3f/-) conditional knockout mice were generated by deep sequencing, in triplicate, using Illumina HiSeq 2000. The sequence reads that passed quality filters were analyzed at the transcript isoform level by ANOVA (ANOVA) and TopHat. qRT-PCR validation was performed using SYBR Green assay. Results: RNA-Seq data were generated with Illumina's HiSeq 2000 system. Raw sequencing data were processed with CASAVA 1.8.2 to generate fastq files. Reads of 50 bases were mapped to the mouse transcriptome and genome mm9 using TopHat 1.3.2. Gene expression values (RPKM) were calculated with Partek Genomics Suite 6.6, which was also used for the ANOVA analysis to determine significantly differentially expressed genes. Conclusions: Our study represents the first detailed analysis of Dlx3Oc-cKO diaphysis and metaphysis from femurs, with biologic triplicates, generated by RNA-seq technology. The optimized data analysis workflows reported here should provide a framework for comparative investigations of expression profiles. We conclude that RNA-seq based transcriptome characterization would expedite genetic network analyses and permit the dissection of complex biologic functions.

DESIGN
Diaphysis and metaphysis mRNA profiles of metaphysis and diaphysis from femurs of 5-wk-old (WT) and Dlx3Oc-cKO male mice were generated by deep sequencing, in triplicate, using Illumina HiSeq 2000.

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
24948010

