TITLE
KB001b:Gene expression profiling of the growth plate of large and small breed dogs provides new insights in endochondral bone formation

ORGANISM
Canis lupus familiaris

SUMMARY
The regeneration of bone in large bone defects remains a challenge in orthopaedics. It may be possible that  the difference in the adult height of mammals, and hence in endochondral bone formation, can serve to identify targets for bone regeneration. In line with this hypothesis, the intra-species disparity in adult height of Great Danes and Miniature Poodles was investigated at a transcriptional level. Microarray analysis of the growth plate of 5 Great Danes and 5 Miniature Poodles revealed 2981 unique genes that were differentially expressed in the two breeds, including many genes with an unknown role in skeletal development. A signalling pathway impact analysis indicated activation of the cell cycle, extracellular matrix receptor interaction, the tight junction pathway, and inhibition of pathways associated with inflammation and the complement cascade. In addition, the BMP pathway was examined, including BMP-2, which is currently used clinically, and BMP-6. As these proteins registered dissimilar mRNA expression the differential effects of BMP-2 and BMP-6 on in vitro osteogenic and chondrogenic differentiation were studied. BMP-6 was at least as potent as BMP-2 in inducing osteogenesis in canine MSCs. However, BMP-2 was a more potent inducer of chondrogenesis than BMP-6. In conclusion, investigating the differential expression of genes involved in endochondral bone formation in small and large breed dogs, could be a promising strategy to identify new targets for bone regenerative medicine.

DESIGN
Microarray expression dataset including growth plate samples from 5 miniature poodles and 6 great danish dogs. Comparisons were analyzed in dyeswap on a 2-color platform against a common reference sample, consisting of a multitude of canine organs, including liver, spleen, kidney, lung, heart, intestine and bone.

PLATFORM
GPL15184 A-UMCU-C44K-1.0

CITATIONS
28681971

MICROARRAYP
T
