TITLE
Sex-specific changes of placental transcriptome in response to a n-3 LCPUFA supplementation of pregnant women

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Previously, we have examined the effect of maternal dietary n-3 LCPUFA supplementation during pregnancy to reduce offspring obesity risk. Considering the involvement of the placenta in fetal programming, we here analyzed the sexually dimorphic potential of placental gene expression, its response to the n-3 LCPUFA intervention and their correlation to offspring obesity risk. The placenta is implicated to play a key role in mediating fetal /metabolic programming of the offspring in utero. For human and mouse models, it has been reported that male and female fetuses differentially respond to in utero environmental stimuli. Moreover, sexual dimorphism is also known for placental gene expression, LCPUFA metabolism and adipose tissue distribution. Therefore, we explored whether the maternal n-3 LCPUFA intervention during pregnancy has a sex-specific impact on the term placental transcriptome in a defined subpopulation of the INFAT (impact of nutritional fatty acids during pregnancy and lactation on early human adipose tissue development) study. In addition, we assessed the relationships between sex-specific placental gene expression and sex steroids levels, and expression changes of specific genes and offspring obesity risk. Overall, human term placentas show sexually dimorphic gene expression and respond sex-specifically to dietary maternal n-3 LCPUFA intervention during pregnancy with more pronounced effects on gene expression and estradiol-17β/testosterone ratio in female than male placentas.

DESIGN
Human term placentas were obtained at birth from participants of the INFAT study, which were randomly assigned at the 15th week of gestation to either a control (healthy nutrition during pregnancy) or the n-3 LCPUFA supplementation group (1020g docosahexaenoic acid and 180g eicosapentaenoic acid per day). For this analysis, placentas were selected that were derived from spontaneous birth, where no induction of labor, anesthetics or analgesics was used. Placenta pieces were sampled according to a standardized protocol and the isolated RNAs (n=16), pooled from four different locations within one placenta, were labeled and hybridized to Affymetrix NuGO_Hs1a52018 arrays. The microarray data was analyzed for (i) the factor n-3 LCPUFA intervention by pooling the data of male and female placentas, (ii) the factor n-3 LCPUFA intervention considering offspring sex by using a model including a sex term, (iii) the factor sex separately in the control and the intervention group and (iv) the factor n-3 LCPUFA intervention separately in male and female placentas.

PLATFORM
GPL18060 NuGO array (human) NuGO_Hs1a520180 [nugohs1a520180hsentrezg 13.0.0 cdf version]

CITATIONS
25348288

