TITLE
EWS-WT1 Oncogene Activates a Neuronal Reprogramming Factor ASCL1 and Mediates Partial Neural Differentiation

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
A chromosomal translocation fusion gene product EWS-WT1 is the defining genetic event in Desmoplastic Small Round Cell Tumor (DSRCT), a rare but aggressive tumor with a high rate of mortality. EWS-WT1 oncogene acts as an aberrant transcription factor that drives tumorigenesis, but the mechanism by which EWS-WT1 causes tumorigenesis is not well understood. To delineate the oncogenic mechanisms, we generated the EWS-WT1 fusion in the mouse using a gene targeting (knock-in) approach, enabling physiologic expression of EWS-WT1 under the native Ews promoter. We derived mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and performed genome-wide expression profiling to identify transcripts directly regulated by EWS-WT1. Remarkably, expression of EWS-WT1 led to a dramatic induction of many neuronal genes. Notably, a neural reprogramming factor, ASCL1 (achaete-scute complex-like 1), was highly induced by EWS-WT1 in MEFs and in primary DSRCT. Further analysis demonstrated that EWS-WT1 directly binds to the proximal promoter region of ASCL1 and activates its transcription through multiple WT1-responsive elements. Depletion of EWS-WT1 in a DSRCT cell line resulted in severe reduction in ASCL1 expression and cell viability. Remarkably, when stimulated with neuronal induction media, cells expressing EWS-WT1 expressed neural markers and generated neurite-like projections. These results demonstrate for the first time that EWS-WT1 activates neural gene expression and is capable of directing partial neuronal differentiation, likely via ASCL1. These findings suggest that stimulating DSRCT tumor cells with biological or chemical agents that promote neural differentiation might be a useful approach to develop novel therapeutics against this incurable disease.

DESIGN
mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and performed genome-wide expression profiling to identify transcripts directly regulated by EWS-WT1 in 0 vs. 24 Hours in three replications (WT+KTS, or WT-KTS in 0, 24 H; CRE in 0 and 24H)

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
24934812

