TITLE
The study of the hepatic transcription profiles of eels caged in an area affected by paper industry

ORGANISM
Anguilla anguilla

SUMMARY
Ecotoxicogenomic studies face the problem of the lack of gene sequence information available for toxicologically relevant non-model pollution sentinel species. In this sense, next generation sequencing technologies allow obtaining deep de novo sequence information cost-effectively. We have thus employed the platform GS-FLX of Roche technologies, in order to sequence the multitissue transcriptome of a fish species under severe population decline, the European eel (Anguilla anguilla), using normalized cDNA (Evrogen). The European eel could be successfully employed in pollution biomonitoring studies as it is a euryhaline teleost that is quite resistant to chemical exposure. We have completed a one whole plate sequencing-run using the Titanium kit of Roche from which a total of 7.8x105 reads were obtained with a length average of 303.53 bp.  Annotated genes, for instance, could be further assessed as biomarkers of exposure to specific chemical compounds in marine, estuarine and river waters. Designed tool will be thus useful, in the study of: a.- the mode of action of chemical compounds in active monitoring studies using caged eels, b.- the physiological processes that are specific to freshwater eels such as the one of sexual development and reproduction, c.- reasons that could explain the disappearance of the species from European waters. In the first context, a caging experiment was  performed to measure the putative effects of a paper industry effluent on eel hepatic transcription levels. For this purpose, eels were caged upstream and downstream to the SMURFFIT-KAPPA paper industry in Iurreta (Biscay, Basque Country). Thus, hepatic transcription profiles reflect the stress levels suffered by eels.

DESIGN
The experiment contains a time serial sampling: T0 = before sampling; T1 = after 3 days of exposure; T2=after 15 days of exposure. In addition, caged eels were placed in 2 sites, Upstream (Up) and Downstream (Do) of the hotspot. 6 samples were dissected per sampling group (5 groups= ToUP; T1UP; T1Do; T2Up; T2Do), 30 samples in total

PLATFORM
GPL18071 Agilent-035147 European eel Custom Array (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

