TITLE
Small artery remodeling depends on the genetic background in spontaneously hypertensive rats (mRNA)

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) have been used frequently as a model for human  essential hypertension. However, both the SHR and its normotensive control, the Wistar Kyoto rat  (WKY), consist of genetically different sublines.   We tested the hypothesis that discrepant data in literature regarding the pathophysiology of  vascular remodeling in hypertension result from the use of different rat sublines.    Using micro-arrays, we studied miRNA and mRNA expression in resistance  arteries of WKY and SHR from three different sources, at 6 weeks and 5 months of age. Both WKY  and SHR showed an age-related expression pattern that involved many genes related to the  extracellular matrix. In SHR, this pattern was more extensive and included a specific increase in miR132-3p,  and type III deiodinase. Direct comparison of WKY to SHR also yielded differences in  expression, including thrombospondin 4. Heterogeneity in gene expression among sublines was  associated with differences in blood pressure, body weight, vascular remodeling, endothelial function,  and vessel ultrastructure. Common features in vessels from SHR were an increase in wall thickness,  wall-to-lumen ratio, and internal elastic lamina thickness.   These results indicate that endothelial dysfunction, vascular stiffening, and inward  remodeling of small arteries are not common features of hypertension, but are subline-dependent.  Relatively minor differences in genetic background associate with different types of vascular  remodeling in hypertensive rats. The clinical implication of this study is that more research into   personalized treatment in hypertension is warranted.

DESIGN
2x2 factorial design with 2 ages (6 weeks and 5 months) and 2 strains (WKY and SHR). For each strain 3 genetically different sublines were used. Per combination of conditions (age, strain, subline) one biological replicate was used (12) and for 4 a technical replicate was included (16 arrays in total). Each test sample consists of the mRNA pooled from the vessels of five animals. As common-reference an equimolar pool of all test samples used. SHR/NCrl, WKY/NCrl, and stroke-prone SHR (SHR/SP) rats were obtained from Charles River, the Netherlands. The SHR/NHsd and WKY/NHsd rats were derived from Harlan UK, (Bicester, U.K.) and bred at the local animal facility of the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Spain. WKY/NTac rats were obtained from Taconic Farms (Germantown, NY, USA).

PLATFORM
GPL15084 Agilent-028279 SurePrint G3 Rat GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
26356734

