TITLE
Night heat stress triggered different transcriptomic responses than day stress in green and ripening grapevine (Vitis vinifera) fruits

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
Background: Global climate change, in particular the entailed predicted temperature increase, will noticeably affect plants vegetative and reproductive development. High temperatures alter the composition of the grapevine fruit, one of the most important fruits produced worldwide. This is leading to variable yield and quality, already observed in many growing regions in recent years. However, physiological processes underlying temperature response and tolerance of the grapevine fruit have hardly been investigated. Currently, all studies on fleshy fruits investigating their abiotic stress response on a molecular level were conducted during the day but possible night-specific variations were overlooked. The present study explores the grapevine fruit transcriptomic response at different developmental stages upon heat stress at day and night. Methodology/Principal Results: Short heat stresses (2 h) were applied at day and night to vines bearing clusters sequentially ordered according to the developmental stages along their vertical axis. The recently proposed microvine model was grown in climatic chambers in order to circumvent common constraints and biases introduced in field experiments with perennial vines. Post-véraison berry heterogeneity inside clusters was evaded upon constituting homogenous batches following organic acid and sugar measurements on individual berries. A whole genome transcriptomic approach was subsequently conducted using NimbelGen® 090918 12X microarrays (30K). Results revealed important differences in heat stress responsive pathways according to day or night treatment, in particular regarding genes within phenylpropanoid metabolism. Precise distinction of post-véraison stages led to a stage-specific detection of anthocyanin-related transcripts repressed by heat. Important modifications in cell wall-related processes as well as indications for a heat-induced delay of ripening and sugar accumulation were observed at véraison and reversed in later stages. Conclusion: This first day - night study on heat stress adaption of the grapevine berry shows that the transcriptome of fleshy fruits is differentially affected by abiotic stress at night. The present results emphasize the necessity to include different developmental stages and especially different time points in transcriptomic studies.

DESIGN
A total of 12 samples were analyzed representing three berry developmental stages (two after the onset of ripening, one during green growth). At each stage, heat stress was applied at day and night. Controls and treated berry samples were drawn in triplicates (two in duplicates) at day and at night on the microvine dwarf (Dwarf Rapid Cycling and Continous Flowering; DRCF) gibberellin-insensitive (GAI) mutant.

PLATFORM
GPL17894 NimbleGen 090918 Vitus vinifera exp HX12 [090918_Vitus_exp; GENE_CALL_ID version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

