TITLE
Ovarian Cancer Cell line Panel (OCCP): gene expression data.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Epithelial ovarian cancer is a very heterogeneous disease and remains the most lethal gynaecological malignancy in the Western world. Rational therapeutic approaches need to account for interpatient and intratumoral heterogeneity in treatment design. Detailed characterization of in vitro models representing the different histological and molecular subtypes is therefore imperative.     Strikingly, from ~100 available ovarian cancer cell lines the origin and which subtype they represent is largely unknown. We have extensively and uniformly characterized 39 ovarian cancer cell lines (with mRNA/microRNA expression, exon sequencing, dose response curves for clinically relevant therapeutics) and obtained all available information on the clinical features and tissue of origin of the original ovarian cancer to refine the putative histological subtypes. From 39 ovarian cell lines, 14 were assigned as high-grade serous, four serous-type, one low-grade serous and 20 non-serous type.     Three morphological subtypes (21 Epithelial, 7 Round, 12 Spindle) were identified that showed distinct biological and molecular characteristics, including overexpression of cell movement and migration-associated genes for the Spindle subtype. Clinical validation showed a clear association of the spindle-like tumors with metastasis, advanced stage, suboptimal debulking and poor prognosis. In addition, the morphological subtypes associated with the molecular C1-6 subtypes identified by Tothill et al. [1], Spindle clustered with C1-stromal subtype, Round with C5-mesenchymal and Epithelial with C4 subtype.    We provide a uniformly generated data resource for 39 ovarian cancer cell lines, the ovarian cancer cell line panel (OCCP). This should be the basis for selecting models to develop subtype specific treatment approaches, which is very much needed to prolong the survival of ovarian cancer patients.

DESIGN
Gene expression was measured for 32 ovarian cancer cell lines using the GeneChip Human Exon 1.0 ST Array (Affymetrix). Morphological subtypes were assigned based on cell morphology, size, growth pattern and proliferation rate during culturing of the cell lines.

PLATFORM
GPL5175 [HuEx-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
25230021

