TITLE
Narrow-band UVB phototherapy for psoriasis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Psoriasis is a common chronic inflammatory and hyperproliferative immune-mediated skin disorder. Narrow-band UVB (NB-UVB) phototherapy is a convenient first-line treatment of psoriasis, though the mechanisms underlying its efficacy have not been completely elucidated. In order to improve our understanding of NB-UVB phototherapy, gene expression profiling was used to characterize gene expression in lesional epidermis from psoriasis patients undergoing NB-UVB phototherapy. Increased expression of melanogenesis pathway genes was observed to be the earliest response. At the end of treatment, genes involved in diverse biological processes were affected, such as pigmentation, cell adhesion, ectodermal development and metabolism. The relationship between gene expression and treatment outcome was further studied using Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis (PLS-DA). Gene ontology analysis showed that genes responding to phototherapy and highly correlated to treatment outcome were involved in oxidation reduction, growth and mitochondria organization. In particular SPATA18, a key regulator of mitochondria quality, was found to be significantly downregulated in psoriasis, and its upregulation following phototherapy was required for optimal clinical improvement. Our data suggest that oxidation reduction is a critical event for the resolution of psoriatic plaques.

DESIGN
Twelve patients diagnosed with plaque type psoriasis were recruited to the study. NB-UVB irradiation was administered to the whole body two to three times a week. Treatment comprising approximately 24 sessions was given during two to three months. A total of six 4 mm diameter punch biopsies were taken from lesions on each psoriasis patient: two prior to UV treatment (pre-UV), two at the middle stage of UV treatment (after about one month of treatment, mid-UV) and two before the last treatment session (post-UV). Twelve healthy age-, sex- and skin type-matched volunteers were also recruited and two punch biopsies were taken from the buttocks. RNA was extracted from Laser capture microdissected epidermis.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
24909845

