TITLE
Gene Expression Changes in Laser Capture Microdissected Nasal Respiratory Epithelium of Rats Exposed to Hydrogen Sulfide

ORGANISM
Rattus rattus

SUMMARY
Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is a naturally occurring gas that is also associated with several industries.  The potential for widespread human inhalation exposure to this toxic gas is recognized as a public health concern.  The nasal epithelium is particularly susceptible to H2S-induced pathology.  Injury to and regeneration of the nasal respiratory mucosa occurred in animals with ongoing H2S exposure suggesting that the regenerated respiratory epithelium undergoes an adaptive response and becomes resistant to further H2S induced toxicity.  To better understand this adaptive response, twenty-four naive 10-week old male Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed to air or 200 ppm H2S in a nose-only exposure system for 3h/d for 1 or 5 consecutive days.  Nasal respiratory epithelial cells at the site of injury and regeneration were laser capture microdissected and gene expression profiles were generated at time 3h, 6h, 24h, and 144h post initial exposure using the Affymetrix Rat Genome 430 2.0 microarray. Gene ontology enrichment analysis identified early gene changes in such functional categories as signal transduction, inflammatory/defense response, cell cycle, and response to oxidative stress.  Later gene changes occurred in categories involved in cell cycle, DNA repair, transport, and micro-tubule-based movement.  These data contribute to our understanding of the nasal epithelial cells? response to inhaled environmental toxicants.  A better understanding of the H2S cytotoxicity mechanism will improve human risk assessment. Keywords: Time course

DESIGN
Twenty-four naive 10-week old male Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed to air or 200 ppm H2S in a nose-only exposure system for 3h/d for 1 or 5 consecutive days.  Nasal respiratory epithelial cells at the site of injury and regeneration were laser capture microdissected and gene expression profiles were generated at time 3h, 6h, 24h, and 144h post initial exposure using the Affymetrix Rat Genome 430 2.0 microarray.

PLATFORM
GPL1355 [Rat230_2] Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
18467678

