TITLE
Expression data from shoots of rice seedlings after inoculation by Sinorhizobium meliloti 1021

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa Japonica Group

SUMMARY
Comparative transcriptome was profiled of rice seedling shoots in responding to live S. meliloti1021(LS) and dead S. meliloti1021 (DS) inoculation. The shoots with LS and DS were collected at 1, 2, 5 and 8 DAI respectively for microarry analysis. A total of 2413 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were detected (q ≤ 0.05 and 1.5-fold change used as a cutoff), showing significantly differences between LS and DS. Enriched gene ontology terms and pathways analysis indicated that functions of these DEGs were observably involved in biotic stress, cellular regulation, plant hormone transduction, cell cycle and cell division. Among the classes of transcription factors, some key regulatory gene families such as WRKYs, NAC, bZIP, MYB and ZIM were involved in responding to defense. Others such as AUX, E2F/DP, BES1 and GASR were growth related. We used microarrays to profile the global view of gene expression underlying S. meliloti 1021 inoculation and identified regulated plant genes and pathway that likely key events in endophytic colonization and molecular promotion mechanism.

DESIGN
Surface sterilized seeds were germinated in petri plates with distilled water in the dark for 3 days at 28°C. And  then transferred aseptically into sterilized glass bottle, which containing 175 cm3 of sterile vermiculite and 100 mL of 1/4 Kimura B solution. After 2 days transferred to sterilized glass bottle, the seedling were inoculation with live S. meliloti1021 (LS) as treatment and dead S. meliloti1021 (DS) as control. Shoots from inoculated by live S. meliloti1021 (LS) and dead bacteria as control (DS) were collected at 1, 2, 5 and 8 DAI respectively. Every RNA sample was derived from 5 independent seedlings. In sum, four time points were selected and three biological replicates were performed, totally 24 rice genome arrays were used.

PLATFORM
GPL2025 [Rice] Affymetrix Rice Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

