TITLE
miRNA-mediated post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in ABR17 transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana under salt stress

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Micro RNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small endogenous RNAs conserved in eukaryotic organisms including plants. They suppress gene expression post-transcriptionally in many different biological processes. Previously, we reported salinity-induced changes in gene expression in transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana plants that constitutively expressed a pea abscisic acid-responsive (ABR17) gene. In the current study, we used a microarray to investigate the role of miRNA-mediated post-transcriptional gene regulation in these same transgenic plants in the presence and absence of salinity stress. We identified nine miRNAs that were significantly modulated due to ABR17 gene expression, and seven miRNAs that were modulated in response to salt stress. The target genes regulated by these miRNAs were identified using starBase (sRNA target Base) Degradome analysis and through 5' RNA Ligase Mediated-Rapid Amplification of cDNA Ends (RLM-RACE). Our findings revealed miRNA:mRNA interactions comprising regulatory networks of Auxin Response Factor (ARF), ARGONAUTE 1, (AGO1), Dicer-like proteins 1 (DCL1), Squamosa Promoter Binding (SPB), NAC, APETALA 2 (AP2), Nuclear Factor-Y (NFY), RNA binding proteins, Arabidopsis thaliana vacuolar phyrophosphate 1 (AVP1) and Pentatricopetide repeat (PPR) in ABR17 transgenic A. thaliana, which control physiological, biochemical and stress signalling cascades due to the imposition of salt stress. Our results are discussed within the context of the effect of the transgene, ABR17, and the roles miRNA expression may play in mediating plant responses to salinity.

DESIGN
In this miRNA-microarray experiment, a total of 4 samples were analyzed with their 3 biological replicates. Two samples, WT and ABR17 control (without salt treatment), were used as reference controls.

PLATFORM
GPL18095 LC Sciences A. thaliana miRNA LC_MRA-1010_miRArabidopsisT_17

CITATIONS
Shiv S Verma, Rakesh Kumar Sinha, Muhammad H. Rahman, Swati Megha, Mike   Deyholos, Nat N.V. Kav. Small RNA (miRNA): post-transcriptionally modulates   the expression of Pea Abscisic acid responsive (ABR17) gene which mimics   salinity tolerance in Arabidopsis. *Plant Molecular Biology Reporter DOI 10.1007/s11105-014-0716-2 (2014).

