TITLE
Microarray profiling of rectal tumor samples

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Using Human WG CodeLink microarrays, we established the expression profiling of 26 LARC without metastasis to gain insight into the molecular signatures associated with response to treatment after CRT.

DESIGN
The study initially included a total of 35 consecutive patients with locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC) treated at Virgen de las Nieves Hospital from 2008 until 2010. Written informed consent was obtained from all the patients, and the study protocol was approved by the local Clinical Research (Ethics) Committee. They were distributed in two subgroups following a histological classification of response to treatment. Pretherapeutic staging was performed, including complete medical history and physical evaluation, digital rectal examination, endorectal ultrasound, rigid rectoscopy, colonoscopy, PET/TC and chest x-ray. Tumor samples were prospectively obtained during the rectoscopy. All patients subsequently received a total dose of 50.4Gy of radiatio (28 fractions of 1.8Gy) associated with capecitabine or capecitabine  and oxaliplatine. Standardized surgery was performed, including total mesorectal excision, after an interval of 8 weeks after chemoradiotherapy.  Tumor response was assessed in surgical specimen by semi-quantitative pathological examination (regression grade) including UICC stage. Histopathological tumor regression was graded based on the semiquantitative 5 point tumor regression grading (TRG) system: TRG1 or a TRG2 scores were considered Responders, whereas TRG3, TRG4, and TRG5 scores were classified as Non-Responders. In addition, the tumor regression or radiotherapy effects were assessed by positron emission tomography (18F-FDG PET). Tumor samples of LARC were collected from 35 patients. Nine patients were finally excluded due to the poor quality of the RNA or contradictory results of Mandard´s criteria and histopathological downstaging, resulting a total of 26 patients. Complete clinical data regarding, age, sex, stage of disease, response to therapy, and overall survival from 26 patients (10 responders and 16 non-responders) was provided in the sample characteristics field. CRT: Chemoradiation; Cap: Capecitabine; Capox: Capecitabine and Oxaliplatine; cTN: clinical stage; Surg: surgical technique; LAR: Low anterior resection; APR: Abdmino-perineal resection; HART: Hartmann, TRG: Tumor Regression Grade; Downst: Downstaging; Downs: downsizing, Resp: response, CPR: complete pathologic response

PLATFORM
GPL18134 CodeLink Human Whole Genome Array [DISCOVERY probe type]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

