TITLE
White Matter transcriptome in chronic alcoholism

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Chronic alcohol consumption can lead to alchohol-related brain damage (ARBD). Despite the well known acute effects of alcohol the mechanism responsible for chronic brain damage is largely unknown. Pathologically the major change is the loss of white matter while neuronal loss is mild and restricted to a few areas such as the prefrontal cortex. In order to improve our understanding of ARBD pathogenesis we used microarrays to explore the white matter transcriptome of alcoholics and controls. Our results suggest that hepatic encephalopathy, along with two confounders, gray matter contamination and low RNA quality, are major drivers of gene expression in ARBD. All three exceeded the effects of alcohol itself. In particular, low quality RNA samples were characterized by an upregulation of protein translation machinery while hepatic encephalopathy was associated with a downregulation of mitochondrial energy metabolism pathways. The findings in HE alcoholics are consistent with the metabolic acidosis seen in this condition. In contrast non-HE alcoholics had widespread but only subtle changes in gene expression in their white matter.

DESIGN
The initial cohort was compromised of four alcoholics without hepatic encephalopathy (non-HE alcoholics), three alcoholics with HE (HE alcoholics) and three neurologically normal controls. For each indvidual frozen white matter was sampled in the superior frontal gyrus (prefrontal cortex) and the precentral gyrus (motor cortex). These two cortices experience either moderate (prefrontal cortex) or no neuronal loss (motor cortex) with alcohol-related brain damage. Each white matter sample was divided in two before RNA was extracted  to give two 'biological' repeats and a total of 40 samples. Subsequently eight duplicates were removed due to their gray matter contamination or low RNA quality to leave a 32-sample cohort (23 alcoholic (including eight with HE ) and nine control samples.

PLATFORM
GPL13667 [HG-U219] Affymetrix Human Genome U219 Array

CITATIONS
24460866

