TITLE
Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma recapitulates the expressional profile of Subtype II Leiomyosarcoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS), used to be called malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH), is a malignant soft tissue tumor of uncertain origin, and is characterized by morphology. UPS often share similar morphological characters with other sarcomas, especially Leiomyosarcoma.  Leiomyosarcoma (LMS) is another malignant soft tissue sarcoma with complex genomic abnormalities, origin from smooth muscle.  As a result, development of gene signature and/or biomarkers distinguishing UPS and LMS will definitely help the pathologist to precisely diagnose those patients. However, in the past, UPS was reported to be indistinguishable with LMS by genomic profiles.  Methods and Results: In this study, 3’ end RNA Sequencing (3SEQ) was used to expression profile 6 UPS and 99 LMS cases.  Overall, UPS was undistinguished with LMS by 3SEQ data, however, when we stratified LMS into three subtypes, UPS was shown to share similar expression pattern with Subtype II LMS, but had distinct molecular expression patterns with Subtype I and Subtype III LMS.  Additional Immunohistochemistry staining by using LMS Subtype I and Subtype II markers validated that UPSs were positive for Subtype II marker ARL4C, but negative for Subtype I marker LMOD1. Furthermore, CD4 was shown to be significantly more highly expressed in UPS than LMS in both mRNA and protein levels.  Conclusion: This study first reported that UPS shared similar gene expression pattern with subtype II LMS and UPS recapitulated the expression profiles of subtype II LMS.

DESIGN
In this study, 3’ end RNA Sequencing (3SEQ) was used to expression profile 6 UPS and 99 LMS cases. In order to explore the molecular differences between UPS and LMS, We analyzed the expression data by SAMseq  to identify the genes which were significantly differently expressed between UPS and LMS, between UPS and each LMS subtype.

PLATFORM
GPL10999 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
25896974

