TITLE
Medial Tibial Plateau articular cartilage changes 2 ,4 and 8 weeks after DMM

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Objective: To Identify gene changes in the medial tibial plateau of articular cartilage at 2, 4 and 8 weeks after destabilisation of the medial meniscus (DMM) in mice and compare our data set with previously published sets to ascertain dysregulated pathways and genes in osteoarthritis. Materials and methods: RNA was extracted from the ipsilateral and contralateral medial tibial plateaus, amplified, labelled and hybridized on Illumina WG_v2 microarrays. Results were confirmed by RT-PCR for selected genes. Results: Transcriptional analysis and network reconstruction revealed changes in extracellular matrix (ECM) and cytoskeletal genes induced by DMM. TGFalpha signalling pathway and complement and coagulation cascade genes were regulated at 2 weeks. Fibronectin (FN1) is a hub in a reconstructed network of potential protein-protein interactions at 2 weeks. Regulated genes decrease over time and by eight weeks fibromodulin (FMOD) and tenascin N (TNN) are the only dysregulated genes present in the DMM operated knees. Comparison with human and rodent published gene sets discovered genes overlapping between our array and 6 others. Conclusions: Cartilage contributes a minute percentage to the RNA extracted from the whole joint ( > 0.2%), yet is sensitive to changes in gene expression post-DMM. The post-DMM transcriptional reprogramming wanes over time and dissipates by 8 weeks. Common pathways between published gene sets include focal adhesion, regulation of actin cytoskeleton and TGFalpha. Common genes include Jagged 1 (Jag1), Tetraspanin 2 (Tspan2), neuroblastoma, suppression of tumourigenicity 1 (Nbl1) and N-myc downstream regulated gene 2 (Ndrg2). The concomitant genes and pathways we identify are novel and warrant further investigation as biomarkers or modulators of osteoarthritis.

DESIGN
In total 18 samples. Each sample was a pool of the medial tibial plateau of 8 mice. Two categories (Treated and untreated) with three biological replicates each and three time points (2, 4 and 8 weeks post-surgery).

PLATFORM
GPL6887 Illumina MouseWG-6 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
25545425

