TITLE
Whole genome expression profiling of rice leaves treated with Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae secreted cell wall degrading lipase/esteraseA (LipA) at early time points, 30 min. and 120 min.

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa

SUMMARY
Treatment of rice tissues with purified preparations of a Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo) secreted plant cell wall degrading enzyme, Lipase/Esterase (LipA), elicits cell wall damage induced innate immune responses. LipA activity is required for induction of defense responses. In order to characterize the early events during elaboration of cell wall degrading enzyme, Lipase/Esterase (LipA) induced innate immune response in rice, we have performed global gene expression profiling of rice leaves treated with purified LipA at early time points, 30 minutes and 120min, after treatment. Whole genome transcriptional profiling was performed using Affymetrix Rice GeneChips

DESIGN
Leaves of two weeks old green house grown susceptible rice cultivar (Taichung Native-1; TN-1) were infiltrated with either 30-40μl of purified Xoo  Lipase/Esterase (LipA)(500μg/ml) or with buffer (10mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 6.0) alone (as described in Jha et al. 2007; MPMI vol 20, pp 31-40). The plants were shifted to a growth chamber (28oC; 80% relative humidity; 12/12h light/dark cycle) 48 hours before the treatment. 20-30 leaf pieces covering the infiltrated zone from each of the treatments were harvested 30 min. and 120 min. after infiltration. Total RNA isolated from the pooled samples was subjected for expression analysis using Affymetrix GeneChip System. The experiment was repeated with three different biological replicates using RNA isolated from three batches of rice leaves treated with the freshly purified Xoo  Lipase/Esterase (LipA)and the buffer Gene Expression profiling of rice leaves undergoing an innate immune respone induced by LipA (Lipase/Esterase A) enzyme

PLATFORM
GPL2025 [Rice] Affymetrix Rice Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

