TITLE
The global regulator FfSge1 is required for expression of secondary metabolite gene clusters but not for pathogenicity in Fusarium fujikuroi

ORGANISM
Fusarium fujikuroi

SUMMARY
The phytopathogenic fungus Fusarium fujikuroi is the causal agent of bakanae disease on rice due to its ability to produce gibberellins. Besides these phytohormones, F. fujikuroi is able to produce a wide range of other secondary metabolites (SMs), such as mycotoxins and pigments. Although much progress has been made in the field of secondary metabolism over the last years, the transcriptional regulation of SM biosynthetic genes is complex and far from being fully understood. Environmental conditions (e.g. nitrogen availability and pH), global and pathway-specific regulators as well as chromatin remodeling were shown to play major roles in this regulation. Here, the role of FfSge1, a homolog of the morphological switch regulators Wor1 and Ryp1 in Candida albicans and Histoplasma capsulatum, respectively, is explored with emphasis on secondary metabolism. FfSge1 is not required for conidia formation and pathogenicity, but is involved in vegetative growth. Genome-wide transcriptome analysis of the Δffsge1 deletion mutant compared to the wild type revealed that FfSge1 is a global regulator of secondary metabolism in F. fujikuroi that activates the expression of several SMs. In addition, FfSge1 is also required for expression of a yet uncharacterized SM gene cluster containing a noncanonical non-ribosomal peptide synthetase. Investigation of whole genome gene expression of the Fusarium fujikuroi wild type IMI58289, Δffsge1 mutant under nitrogen starvation and nitrogen sufficient conditions.

DESIGN
In this study we hybridized in total 8 microarrays using total RNA recovered from a wild-type culture of F. fujikuroi IMI58289 and Δffsge1 mutant culture. All cultures were grown on a 6 mM Gln (10%) and a 60 mM Gln medium (100%). For each combination of culture and medium a biological replicate was created. Each chip measures the expression level of 14,397 genes from F. fujikuroi IMI58289 with eight 60-mer probes. Please note that the wild type samples have been published as part of the GEO accession GSE43745, but re-analyzed with the Δffsge1 mutant samples in the current study.

PLATFORM
GPL16547 NimbleGen Fusarium fujikuroi annotation version 1 gene expression array [110407_UG_Ffujikuroi_expr]

CITATIONS
25115968

