TITLE
The miRNAome of O. viverrini induced cholangiocarcinoma by microarray:

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Cholangiocarcinoma is the second most common primary hepatic malignancy worldwide, with intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) a particularly significant public health problem in Southeast Asia, due to its strong association with the food-borne parasite Opisthorchis viverrini (OV). This manuscript represents the first comprehensive miRNA expression profiling by microarray of the three most common histological grades of OV-induced ICC: moderately differentiated, papillary, and well differentiated tumor tissue. No cohort of miRNAs emerged as commonly dysregulated among these histological grades of OV-induced ICC. Instead, each histological grade of ICC tissue showed a distinct miRNA profile. Moderately differentiated tumor tissue showed both the greatest number and the highest magnitude of miRNA dysregulation, followed by papillary ICC tumor tissue, and differentiated ICC tumor tissue. When ICC tumor tissue was compared to adjacent non-tumor tissue, a remarkable similarity in miRNA dysregulation was observed between these samples, indicative of intrahepatic metastasis. These findings indicate the possibility of determining the histological grade of ICC by profiling miRNA dysregulation, which not only would greatly enhance the molecular diagnosis of ICC, but could even lead to the personalized the treatment for ICC by the early classification of histological grade.

DESIGN
A total of 46 unique liver tissue samples were analyzed on Agilent human miRNA microarray (miRBase Release 16.0). Of the 46 samples, 13 are from non-cancer healthy patients with gastric bypass surgery. The rest of 33 samples are CCA tumor tissue samples and their paired adjacent normal/necrotic tissue: 12 from well differentiated CCA, 17 from papillary CCA, 4 from moderately differentiated CCA.

PLATFORM
GPL18159 Agilent-031181 Unrestricted_Human_miRNA_V16.0_Microarray 030840

CITATIONS
25017828

