TITLE
The developmental dynamics and disease potential of random monoallelic gene expression

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) in females and allelic exclusion of olfactory receptor or immunoglobulin loci, represent classic examples of random monoallelic expression (RME). RME of some single copy genes has also been reported, but the in vivo relevance of this remains unclear. Here we identify several hundred RME genes in clonal neural progenitor cell lines derived from embryonic stem cells. RME occurs during differentiation and once established, the monoallelic state can be highly stable. We show that monoallelic expression also occurs in vivo, in the absence of DNA sequence polymorphism, similarly to XCI. Several of the genes identified play important roles in development and have also been implicated in human autosomal dominant disorders. We propose that monoallelic expression of such genes contributes to the fine-tuning of the developmental regulatory pathways they control and in the context of a mutation, RME can predispose to loss of function in a proportion of cells and thus contribute to disease.

DESIGN
The hybrid mouse ES cell lines F1-21.6 and F1-23 (129Sv-Cast/EiJ), previously described in (Luikenhuis et al., 2001) and (Jonkers et al., 2009), were grown on mitomycin C-inactivated MEFs in ES cell media containing 15% FBS (Gibco), 10-4 M b-mercaptoethanol (Sigma), 1000U/ml of leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF, Chemicon). Mouse ES cells were differentiated into neural progenitor cells (NPC) as previously described (Conti et al., 2005; Splinter et al., 2011). Total RNAs were prepared from the mouse ES cell lines, 4 NPC clones derived from ES cell line F1-21.6 plus one replicate, and 4 NPC clones derived from ES cell line F1-23 plus one replicate. Library preparation after polyadenylated RNA purification was performed according to the standard Illumina instructions. Paired-end 100bp reads were generated using the HiSeq 2000 sequencing platform.

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
24576422

