TITLE
SIRT1 affects DNA methylation of polycomb group protein target genes (PGCTs), a hotspot of the epigenetic shift observed in ageing.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Beneficial effects of SIRT1 on healthspan are likely to be pleiotropic and may include effects on DNA methylation.  We demonstrated recently that manipulating SIRT1 in human cells affected DNA methylation of a panel of test genes, and that genes with expression modified by dietary restriction corresponded with genes that underwent changes in DNA methylation during ageing.  Here we tested the hypothesis that genes particularly susceptible to SIRT1-induced effects on DNA methylation across the genome map to genes for which DNA methylation changes during ageing.  We increased or reduced SIRT1 expression in human intestinal (Caco-2) and vascular endothelial (HuVEC) cells by transient transfection with an expression construct or with siRNA respectively.  Effects on DNA methylation were measured by enriching for the methylated faction then either sequencing (HuVEC) or hybridising to a human promoter microarray (Caco-2).  Effects using these two different cell lines and techniques for analysis were remarkably consistent.  Genes with a DNA methylation status affected by SIRT1 manipulation were enriched for those that undergo age-dependent changes in DNA methylation, thus supporting our hypothesis.  Polycomb group protein target genes (PCGTs), which are suppressed by epigenetic mechanisms in stem cells and have been shown previously to correspond with loci particularly susceptible to age-related changes in DNA methylation, were over-represented within the set of genes showing altered DNA methylation in response to SIRT1 manipulation in both cell lines.  We thus propose that effects of SIRT1 to extend healthspan include influences on the DNA methylation status of genes affected during ageing, in particular PCGTs.

DESIGN
MBD-Sequencing to ascertain effects of SIRT1 over & under expression on methylation, in presence and absence of TNF-alpha. One sample per condition.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

