TITLE
Electrophilic lipid mediator 15-deoxy-Δ12,14-prostaglandin J2 modifies glucocorticoid signaling via receptor SUMOylation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Cortisol, the central stress hormone in humans, activates the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Anti-inflammatory effects are the most important pharmaceutical effects mediated by the GR. Inasmuch as electrophilic cyclopentenone prostaglandin 15-deoxy-Δ12,14-prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2) has potent anti-inflammatory properties and activates the SUMOylation pathway, we have investigated the effect of 15d-PGJ2 on glucocorticoid signaling and receptor SUMOylation. To this end, we studied isogenic HEK293 cells expressing either wild-type GR or SUMOylation-defective GR. Interestingly, 15d-PGJ2 triggered SUMO-2/3 modification in the primary SUMOylation sites of the GR. Gene expression profiling and pathway analyses indicate that 15d-PGJ2 inhibits GR signaling in a genome-wide fashion that is significantly dependent on the GR SUMOylation sites. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that the repressive effect of 15d-PGJ2 on GR target gene expression occurs in parallel with the inhibition of receptor binding to the target gene chromatin. Furthermore, depletion of the sole SUMO E2 conjugase UBC9 from HEK293 cells confirmed the involvement of active SUMOylation in the regulatory process. Taken together, our data indicate that GR SUMOylation modulates the glucocorticoid signaling during acute cell stress. Our data also suggest that GR SUMOylation modulates crosstalk of the glucocorticoid signaling with other transcription factors that are responsive to cell stress.

DESIGN
Total RNA isolated from isogenic HEK293 cell lines stably expressing either wild-type GR (wtGR) or SUMOylation-defective GR (GR3KR) treated with 100 nM of dexamethasone (dex) in the presence or absence of 5 µM 15d-PGJ2 for 6h. All conditions are performed in triplicate

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
24980431

