TITLE
Comparison of gene expression for contraction- and freeze-induced skeletal muscle injuries

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Common acute injuries to skeletal muscle can lead to significant pain and disability.  The current therapeutic approaches for treating muscle injuries are dependent on the clinical severity but not on the type of injury.  The aim of this study was to compare the molecular events accompanying the degeneration and repair phases of contraction- and trauma-induced muscle injuries by applying DNA microarray methodology to two well-characterized mouse models of skeletal muscle injury, i.e., eccentric contraction-induced injury (CI) and traumatic injury induced by freezing (FI).  Histopathological evaluation and measurements of muscle strength were accompanied by analyses of expression for 12,488 known genes at four time points ranging from 6 hours to 7 days post-injury.  Real-time RT-PCR was used to confirm some of the gene expression temporal profiles.  While both types of injury cause early induction of transcription, myogenic, and stress-responsive factors, they also induce injury type-specific gene expression profiles.  CI only activates a set of genes associated with the protection and repair of protein and structural integrity while FI activates gene sets which result in extensive inflammatory responses, tissue remodeling, angiogenesis, and myofibre and extracellular matrix synthesis.  This study identified genes that are candidates for therapeutic manipulation following two disparate types of muscle injury. Keywords: time course, comparative genomic hybridization

DESIGN
2 types of skeletal muscle injury (eccentric contraction- and freeze-induced) x 4 time points after injury (6 hours, 1 day, 3 days, and 7 days post-injury). There were 3 samples for each of the 8 cells with the exception of the 'contraction injury, 1 day post-injury' and 'freeze injury, 7 days post-injury' cells; for each of these 2 cells, there were only 2 samples. Additionally, there were 3 control (i.e., uninjured) muscle samples.

PLATFORM
GPL81 [MG_U74Av2] Affymetrix Murine Genome U74A Version 2 Array

CITATIONS
17478534

