TITLE
Genome-wide sequencing of small RNAs of Echinococcus granulosus shows microRNAs may be involved life cycle stage development and differentiation

ORGANISM
Echinococcus granulosus

SUMMARY
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are important post-transcriptional regulators which control growth and development in eukaryotic animals. The cestode Echinococcus granulosus has a complex life-cycle involving different development stages but the mechanisms underpinning this development, including the involvement of miRNAs, remain unknown. Using Illumina deep-sequencing technology, we sequenced at the genome-wide level three small RNA populations from the adult, protoscolex and cyst membrane of E. granulosus. A total of 94 miRNA candidates (coding 100 mature miRNAs and 30 miRNA*s) were predicted by a computational pipeline, of which 25 mature miRNAs and 2 miRNA*s were identified experimentally. Through comparison of expression profiles, we found 48 mature miRNAs and 17 miRNA*s expressed in different patterns in the three life stages examined and 31 of them were validated by real-time PCR. Most of the differentially expressed miRNAs exhibited obvious up-regulated expressions in the adult stage and down-regulation in the hydatid cyst. A total of 3,622 genes were predicted to be targets of 126 mature miRNAs and 50 miRNA*s. Further analysis of the differentially expressed miRNAs and their potential targets indicated that they may be involved in bi-directional development, nutrient metabolism and nervous system development in E. granulosus. This study has, for the first time, provided a comprehensive description of the different expression patterns of miRNAs in the three distinct life cycle stages of E. granulosus. Understanding the regulatory processes involving miRNAs in E. granulosus may help in the exploration of the mechanism of interaction between this parasitic worm and its definitive and intermediate hosts and provide new information to develop new intervention strategies for control of cystic echinococcosis.

DESIGN
Examination of small RNA populations in 3 different life stages of Echinococcus granulosus

PLATFORM
GPL18185 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Echinococcus granulosus)

CITATIONS
25168356

