TITLE
CD40-mediated amplification of local immunity by keratinocytes in impaired by HPV

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The interaction between the transmembrane glycoprotein surface receptor CD40 expressed by skin keratinocytes (KCs) and its T cell-expressed ligand CD154 was suggested to exacerbate inflammatory skin diseases. However, the full spectrum of CD40-mediated effects by KCs underlying this observation is unknown. Therefore, changes in gene expression after CD40 ligation of KCs were studied by microarrays. CD40-mediated activation for 2 hours stimulated the expression of a coordinated network of immune-involved genes strongly interconnected by IL8 and TNF, while after 24 hours anti-proliferative and anti-apoptotic genes were upregulated. CD40 ligation stimulated the production of chemokines that attracted lymphocytes and myeloid cells from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Thus, CD40-mediated activation of KCs resulted in a highly coordinated response of genes required for the local development and sustainment of adaptive immune responses. The importance of this process was confirmed by a study on the effects of human papilloma virus (HPV) infection to the KC’s response to CD40 ligation. HPV infection clearly attenuated the magnitude of the response to CD40 ligation and consequently the KC’s capacity to attract PBMCs. The fact that HPV attenuates CD40 signalling in KCs indicates the importance of the CD40-CD154 immune pathway in boosting cellular immunity within epithelia.

DESIGN
Total RNA from eight 72 hours 50 IU/ml IFNgamma pre-stimulated primary undifferentiated keratinocyte cultures, four uninfected and four HPV-positive, that were either left unstimulated, or stimulated for 2 hours with IFNgamma and Control- or CD40L-expressing L-cells (mouse fibroblasts), or stimulated for 24 hours with IFNgamma and Control- or CD40L-expressing L-cells. The stimulated samples were generated in duplo. 72 samples were generated in total.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

