TITLE
Impact of monomeric and oligomeric flavanols (MOF) consumption on the gene expression profile of leukocytes (human)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: In a recent intervention study, the daily supplementation with 200mg monomeric and oligomeric flavanols (MOF) from grape seeds for 8 weeks revealed a vascular health benefit in male smokers. The objective of the present study was to determine the impact of MOF consumption on the gene expression profile of leukocytes and to assess changes in DNA methylation. Methodology/Principal Findings: Gene expression profiles were determined using whole genome microarrays (Agilent) and DNA methylation was assessed using HumanMethylation450 BeadChips (Illumina). MOF significantly modulated the expression of 869 genes. The majority of the affected genes are involved in chemotaxis, cell adhesion, cell infiltration or cytoskeleton organisation, suggesting lower immune cell adhesion to endothelial cells. This was corroborated by in vitro experiments showing that MOF exposure of monocytes attenuates their adhesion to TNFα-stimulated endothelial cells. Nuclear factor-kappa B reporter gene assays confirmed that MOF decrease the activity of NF-κB. Strong inter-individual variability in the leukocytes DNA methylation was observed. As a consequence, on group level, changes due to MOF supplementation could not be found. However, in individuals, significant changes in DNA methylation of genes involved in leukocyte rolling, adhesion and cytoskeleton remodelling were seen. At the group level, the variation in DNA methylation related to life style and clinical parameters appeared to overrule the magnitude of effects of supplementation with MOF. Conclusion: Our study revealed that regular consumption of MOF modulates the expression of genes in immune cells which, however, cannot be correlated to alterations in the DNA methylome. Remarkably, at the individual level, genes related to leukocyte adhesion pathways present complex variation in DNA methylation. As such, the individual transcriptional and epigenetic modulation of genes involved in early manifestation of cardiovascular diseases constitutes important subcellular mechanisms by which MOF promote vascular health in humans.

DESIGN
Two-colors experiment, 7 volunteers : blood samples of 7 men, before and after an intervention of 8 weeks with daily intake of MOF (14 samples).

PLATFORM
GPL10332 Agilent-026652 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K v2 (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
24763279

