TITLE
STAG2 is a clinically relevant tumor suppressor in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
STAG2 is targeted by somatic aberrations in a subset (4%) of human PDAs. Transposon mediated disruption of STAG2 in a KRASG12D genetically engineered mouse model promotes the development of PDA and its progression to metastatic disease. There was a statistically significant loss of STAG2 protein expression in human tumor tissue (Wilcoxon-Rank test) with complete absence of STAG2 staining observed in 15 (4.3%) patients. In univariate Kaplan Meier analysis nearly complete STAG2 positive staining ( > 95% of nuclei positive) was associated with a median survival benefit of 6.41 months (p = 0.031). The survival benefit of adjuvant chemotherapy was only seen in patients with a STAG2 staining of less than 95% (median survival benefit 7.65 months; p = 0.028). Multivariate Cox Regression analysis showed that STAG2 is an independent prognostic factor for survival in pancreatic cancer patients. Finally we show that RNAi mediated knockdown of STAG2 selectively sensitizes human PDA cell lines to platinum-based therapy.

DESIGN
We used DNA content flow sorting to identify and purify tumor nuclei of PDA samples from 50 patients. The genome of each sorted sample was profiled by oligonucleotide comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and targeted resequencing of STAG2. Transposon insertions within STAG2 in a KRASG12D driven genetically engineered mouse (GEM) model of PDA were screened by RT-PCR. We then used a tissue microarray (TMA) to survey STAG2 protein expression levels in 344 human PDA tumor samples and adjacent tissues. Univariate Kaplan Meier analysis and multivariate Cox Regression analysis was used to assess the association of STAG2 expression relative to overall survival and responses to adjuvant therapy. Finally RNAi based assays with PDA cell lines were used to assess the potential therapeutic consequence of STAG2 expression in responses to 18 therapeutic agents.

PLATFORM
GPL4091 Agilent-014693 Human Genome CGH Microarray 244A (Feature number version) GPL9777 Agilent-021850 SurePrint G3 Human CGH Microarray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

