TITLE
Expression data from colon and livers of mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Here we describe our unprecedented approach in proposing parsley (PAR) as a nutraceutical intervention in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) using a mouse model of dextran sodium sulphate (DSS)-induced colitis, following a multi-integrated-omics analysis. PAR supplementation (n=7) significantly improved colon shortening and increased the disease activity index compared to the DSS group (n=7). The colonic transcriptome revealed the down-regulation of inflammatory cytokines, and the hepatic transcriptome and metabolome revealed the up-regulation of fatty acid synthesis genes, thereby improving body weight loss. Down-regulated cancer markers were observed in the hepatic transcriptome and proteome. A global plasma metabolite analysis indicated shifts in the citric cycle and urea cycle, implicating improved impaired glycolysis and oxidative stress. Our integration of three omics analyses highlighted the involvement of the methionine-recycling pathway and PAR’s role in decreasing the risk of IBD. This pioneering use of multi-integrated-omics in the evaluation of nutrients’ effects on physiology is expected to be widely useful and informative, shaping the future of nutritional research. Here we describe our unprecedented approach in proposing parsley (PAR) as a nutraceutical intervention in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) using a mouse model of dextran sodium sulphate (DSS)-induced colitis, following a multi-integrated-omics analysis. PAR supplementation (n=7) significantly improved colon shortening and increased the disease activity index compared to the DSS group (n=7). The colonic transcriptome revealed the down-regulation of inflammatory cytokines, and the hepatic transcriptome and metabolome revealed the up-regulation of fatty acid synthesis genes, thereby improving body weight loss. Down-regulated cancer markers were observed in the hepatic transcriptome and proteome. A global plasma metabolite analysis indicated shifts in the citric cycle and urea cycle, implicating improved impaired glycolysis and oxidative stress. Our integration of three omics analyses highlighted the involvement of the methionine-recycling pathway and PAR’s role in decreasing the risk of IBD. This pioneering use of multi-integrated-omics in the evaluation of nutrients’ effects on physiology is expected to be widely useful and informative, shaping the future of nutritional research.

DESIGN
Total hepatic and colonic RNA from each respective group were pooled (n=7). The microarray analysis was carried as out as described by Jia et al. 8 Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array GeneChips (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) containing over 30,000 gene probe sets were used for genome-wide expression profiling.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

