TITLE
Expression data from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of subjects supplemented with vitamin C [qPCR array analysis]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
A role of vitamin C(ascorbic acid) as an antioxidant molecule has been recognized, largely based on in vitro studies. However, more recently, the concept of “antioxidant molecule” has been reconsidered and its biological function is no longer considered to be simply due to its ability to act as “electron donors”, rather, it appears to act by modulating signaling and gene expression. In order to gain a better understanding of the effects of vitamin C supplementation on gene expression in both physiological and pro-inflammatory conditions, we performed  a pilot explorative intervention study based on the utilization of  microarray and qPCR technologies, designed on a “in vivo-ex vivo” structure

DESIGN
Five healthy subjects (three males and 2 females, aged 25-40) were recruited for a short term (five days) intervention  study. Subjects were asked to assume one tablet of Redoxon®  (Bayer), a day (containing 1 gr of ascorbate), for 5 days.  A baseline blood withdrawal was performed in fasting condition,  just before the first vitamin C tablet. Tablets were provided to the volunteers, every morning at the same hour for the following 4 days of the study. The last tablet was supplemented about 1,5  hour before the second and last blood withdrawal, performed again in fasting condition. Plasma and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMNC) were obtained . PBMNC from each subject were splitted in three aliquots: one was stored in lysis buffer at -80°C and utilized to isolate RNA for the Affymetrix gene array analysis. The other two aliquots were resuspended in RPMI 1640 w/o phenol red containing 10% of autologous plasma: one was incubated with 10 ug/ml lipopolysaccharides (LPS) for 5 hours at 37°C. At the end of the incubation time, the medium was collected and stored at -80°C for the assessment of cytokine release in response to the inflammatory stimuli. RNA was extracted from the pelleted cells for gene expression analysis, using the Human NFkB Signaling 96 StellARray™ qPCR array (Lonza). The results obtained with PBMNC isolated after vitamin C supplementation (supplemented PBMNC) were compared to those obtained with PBMNC isolated before the supplementation (baseline PBMNC), for each subject.

PLATFORM
GPL18229 NFkB 96 StellArray qPCR array

CITATIONS
24604612

