TITLE
Glucocorticoid-induced reversal of IL1b stumulated gene expression in OE-E6/7 cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Studies indicate that high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC), the most common epithelial ovarian carcinoma histotype, originates from the fallopian tube epithelium (FTE).  Risk factors for this cancer include reproductive parameters associated with lifetime ovulatory events.  Ovulation is an acute inflammatory process during which the FTE is exposed to follicular fluid containing both pro- and anti-inflammatory molecules, such as interleukin-1 (IL1), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and cortisol.  Repeated exposure to inflammatory cytokines may contribute to transforming events in the FTE, with glucocorticoids exerting a protective effect.  The global response of FTE cells to inflammatory cytokines or glucocorticoids has not been investigated.  To examine the response of FTE cells and the ability of glucocorticoids to   oppose this response, an immortalized human FTE cell line, OE-E6/E7, were treated with IL1β, dexamethasone (DEX), IL1β and DEX, or vehicle and genome-wide gene expression profiling was performed.  IL1β altered the expression of 47 genes of which 17 were reversed by DEX.  DEX treatment alone altered the expression of 590 genes, whereas combined DEX and IL1β treatment altered the expression of 784 genes.  Quantitative real time RT-PCR studies validated the gene array data for IL8, IL23A, TACC2 and PI3. Consistent with the array data, Western blot analysis showed increased levels of PTGS2 protein induced by IL1β that was blocked by DEX. These findings support the hypothesis that pro-inflammatory signaling is induced in FTE cells by inflammatory mediators and raises the possibility that dysregulation of glucocorticoid signaling could contribute to increased risk for HGSOC.

DESIGN
An immortalized human oviductal cell line, OE-E6/E7 was treated with 10 nM dexamethasone and/or 50 ng/ml IL1b.  Cells were harvested 18 hours after treatment and rna was extracted and used for genome-wide gene expression.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

