TITLE
Interferon Lambda Alleles Predict Innate Antiviral Immune Responses and Hepatitis C Virus Permissiveness.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection can result in viral chronicity or clearance. Although host genetics and particularly genetic variation in the interferon lambda (IFNL) locus are associated with spontaneous HCV clearance and treatment success, the mechanisms guiding these clinical outcomes remain unknown. Using a laser capture microdissection-driven unbiased systems virology approach, we isolated and transcriptionally profiled HCV-infected and adjacent primary human hepatocytes (PHH) approaching single cell resolution. An innate antiviral immune signature dominated the transcriptional response, but differed in magnitude and diversity between HCV-infected and adjacent cells. Molecular signatures associated with more effective antiviral control were determined by comparing donors with high and low infection frequencies. Cells from donors with clinically unfavorable IFNL genotypes were infected at a greater frequency and exhibited dampened antiviral and cell death responses. These data suggest that early virus-host interactions, particularly host genetics and induction of innate immunity, critically determine the outcome of HCV infection.

DESIGN
Cell populations of primary human hepatocytes were collected via laser capture microdissection, their transcriptomes were amplified and analyzed via whole Illumina genome microarray. Three populations were collected: virus infected cells, cells adjacent to infected cells (“adjacent”) and mock infected cells. Cells from multiple donors were employed to address host genetic variability on our observed phenotypes. Nine different donors were assessed on 1-day post infection and three donors were assessed 3 days post infection and and four donors were assessed on 7 days post infection. For each cell population (virus infected, adjacent or mock), four biological replicate arrays were performed. In total, we analyzed 186 microarrays

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

