TITLE
G9a influences neuronal subtype specification in striatum

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Cocaine-mediated repression of the histone methyltransferase (HMT) G9a has recently been implicated in transcriptional, morphological, and behavioral responses to chronic cocaine administration. Here, using a ribosomal affinity purification approach, we find that G9a repression by cocaine occurs in both Drd1 (striatonigral)- and Drd2 (striatopallidal)-expressing medium spiny neurons (MSNs). Conditional knockout and overexpression of G9a within these distinct cell types, however, reveals divergent behavioral phenotypes in response to repeated cocaine treatment. Our studies further indicate that such developmental deletion of G9a selectively in Drd2 neurons results in the unsilencing of transcriptional programs normally specific to striatonigral neurons, and the acquisition of Drd1-associated projection and electrophysiological properties. This partial striatopallidal to striatonigral ‘switching’ phenotype in mice indicates a novel role for G9a in contributing to neuronal subtype identity, and suggests a critical function for cell-type specific histone methylation patterns in the regulation of behavioral responses to environmental stimuli.

DESIGN
Polyribosome associated mRNAs from 2-5 month old, age and sex matched Drd1-Cre; Drd1-TRAP; G9afl/fl and Drd1-TRAP; G9afl/fl, Drd2-Cre; Drd2-TRAP; G9afl/fl and Drd2-TRAP; G9afl/fl mice (n = 2-4 mice/genotype/drug treatment, 2 hours after the last of eight repeated cocaine injections of 20 mg/kg/day) were obtained as previously described. EGFP labeled ribosomes and associated mRNAs were immunoprecipitated using a mix of two monoclonal anti-GFP antibodies (50 μg of clones #19C8 and #19F7 for each IP, available at Sloan-Kettering Monoclonal Antibody Facility). Purified mRNA was amplified and processed for microarray and qPCR analysis using the Affymetrix two-cycle cDNA Synthesis kit (Affymetrix) as previously described. Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays were used in all experiments. Information regarding the array design and features can be found at www.affymetrix.com. Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays were scanned using the GeneChip Scanner 3000 (Affymetrix) and globally scaled to 150 using the Affymetrix GeneChip Operating Software (GCOS v1.4).

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
24584053

