TITLE
Analysis of biological characterization and metastasis-related genes in cell lines derived from the Primary lesion and lymph node metastasis of a squamous cell carcinoma arising in the mandibular gingiva

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Controlling metastatic lesions is an important part of improving cancer prognosis, in addition to controlling the primary lesion. There have been many histological examinations of primary and metastatic lesions, but little basic research using cell strains from primary and metastatic lesions belonging to the same patient. In this study, we successfully established a cell strain derived from lower gingival carcinoma (WK2) and a strain derived from secondary cervical lymph node metastasis (WK3F) through primary cultures of tissue from a patient with oral squamous cell carcinoma. We then investigated the biological characteristics of the cancer cell strains from these primary and metastatic lesions, and analyzed metastasis-related genes.  Comparing the biological characteristics in vitro showed WK3F to have higher cell proliferation ability and shorter cell doubling time than WK2. It also showed increased cell migratory ability, and high invasive and self-replication abilities. Heterotransplantation into nude mice resulted in high tumor formation rates in the tongue and high metastasis rates in the cervical lymph nodes.  Changes in WK2 and WK3F gene expression were comprehensively analyzed with the microarray method. Genes with increased expression in WK3F compared to WK2 were extracted when Z-score ≥ 2.0 and ratio ≥ 5.0, while genes with reduced expression in WK3F compared to WK2 were extracted when Z-score ≤ -2.0 and ratio ≤ 0.2. As a result, differences were found in 604 genes. From these, MAGEC1 (88.0 times), MMP-7 (18.6 times), SNAI1 (6.6 times), MACC1 (6.2 times), and HTRA1 (0.012 times) were selected as metastasis-related candidate genes. The results suggest that these molecules could be important to clarifying the mechanism of metastasis, and could become therapeutic targets.

DESIGN
We successfully established a cell strain derived from lower gingival carcinoma (WK2) and a strain derived from secondary cervical lymph node metastasis (WK3F) through primary cultures of tissue from a patient with oral squamous cell carcinoma. Changes in WK2 and WK3F gene expression were comprehensively analyzed with the microarray method.

PLATFORM
GPL17077 Agilent-039494 SurePrint G3 Human GE v2 8x60K Microarray 039381 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

