TITLE
Host cell responses to persistent mycoplasmas--different stages in infection of HeLa cells with Mycoplasma hominis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
M. hominis adherence, colonisation and invasion of HeLa cells were characterised in a time-course study using microarray-based analysis of the HeLa cell transcriptome: 0 h to monitor the baseline of transcription, 4 h to examine host reactions to mycoplasma attachment, 48 h to capture in addition the initiation of invasion, and 2 weeks post infection to examine a chronically infected host cell. At 4 h post infection, cytoadherence of M. hominis to the HeLa cell surface was accompanied by differential regulation of 723 host genes ( > 2 fold change in expression). Genes associated with immune responses and signal transduction pathways were mainly affected and components involved in cell-cycle regulation, growth and death were highly upregulated. At 48 h post infection, when mycoplasma invasion started, 1588 host genes were differentially expressed and expression of genes for lysosome-specific proteins associated with bacterial lysis was detected. In a chronically infected HeLa cell line (2 weeks), of the 1972 regulated host genes, components of the ECM-receptor interaction pathway and phagosome-related integrins were markedly increased. The immune response was quite different to that at the beginning of infection, with a prominent induction of IL1B gene expression, affecting pathways of MAPK signalling, and genes connected with cytokine-cytokine interactions and apoptosis. These data show for the first time the complex, time-dependent reaction of the host directed at mycoplasmal clearance and the counter measures of this pestering pathogen.

DESIGN
To elucidate the host-reactions at the different stages of M. hominis infection, four time points post infection (0h, 4h, 48h, 2 weeks) were chosen for microarray gene expression analyses. Total RNA was prepared from infection assays (MOI 100) in parallel with uninfected HeLa cells and the host cell transcriptomes were determined by comparative microarray analyses.

PLATFORM
GPL14550 Agilent-028004 SurePrint G3 Human GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name Version)

CITATIONS
23326599

