TITLE
Pervasive effects of an endophytic fungus on host genetic and phenotypic expression in a tropical tree (part 1)

ORGANISM
Theobroma cacao

SUMMARY
Inoculation of endophyte-free (E-) Theobroma cacao leaves with Colletotrichum tropicale (E+), the dominant foliar fungal endophyte in healthy T. cacao, induced significant changes in the expression of hundreds of host genes. Further, E+ leaves exhibit enhanced pathogen resistance, increased lignin and cellulose content, reduced maximum rates of photosynthesis (Amax), and enrichment of nitrogen-15 and carbon-13 isotopes that all correspond to the changes in expression of specific functional genes in related pathways. Moreover, a cacao gene highly up-regulated in E+ leaves increases pathogen resistance apart from any direct endophyte effects. Thus, benefits of increased pathogen resistance in E+ plants are partially due to enhanced induction of intrinsic host defense pathways, and potential costs include reduced photosynthetic capacity and endophyte metabolism of host tissues. Similar effects are likely to be properties of most plant-endophyte interactions, suggesting general relevance to the design and interpretation of studies of genetic and phenotypic expression in plants.

DESIGN
The objective of this experiment was to identify Theobroma cacao genes that are differentially expressed between leaves inoculated with fungal endophyte Colletotrichum tropicale (E+ leaves) and control un-inoculated leaves (E- leaves) 14 days post last endophyte inoculation. The experiment was conducted in a Percival growth chambers (model I35LL, 115 volts, 1/4 Hp, series: 8503122.16, Percival Scientific, Inc., Perry IA) with 12/12 h light/dark photoperiod and temperatures of 30ºC and 26ºC respectively. A total of four endophyte spore inoculations (1X10^6 spore/ml) were made by aspersion to a group of T. cacao seedlings and a second group of seedlings were maintained as un-inoculated.  Then six biological replicates per treatment (E+ leaves and six E- leaves) each one belonging from a different seedling were collected and processed for a two color oligo microarray analysis. A total of six arrays were processed, each one hybridized to an inoculated and a control un-inoculated sample in a dye swap design.

PLATFORM
GPL18259 T. cacao 3k 50-mer

CITATIONS
Mejia LC, Herre EA, Sparks JP, Winter K, Garc a MN, Van Bael SA, Stitt J, Shi Z, Zhang Y, Guiltinan MJ and Maximova SN (2014) Pervasive effects of a dominant foliar endophytic fungus on host genetic and phenotypic expression in a tropical tree. Front. Microbiol. 5:479. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00479

