TITLE
The Rio1 kinase downregulates RNA polymerase I to promote rDNA stability and segregation

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
To sustain growth, budding yeast actively transcribes its ribosomal gene array (rDNA) in the nucoleolus to produce ribosomes and proteins. However, intense transcription during rDNA replication may provoke collisions between RNA polymerase I (Pol I) and the replisome, may cause replication fork instability, double-strand breaks, local recombinations and rDNA instability. The latter is manifested by rDNA array expansion or reduction and the formation of extrachromosomal rDNA circles, anomalies that accelerate aging in yeast. Transcription also interferes with the resolution, condensation and segregation of the sister chromatid rDNA arrays. As a consequence, rDNA segregation lags behind the rest of the yeast genome and occurs in late anaphase when rDNA transcription is temporarily shut off. How yeast promotes the stability and transmission of its rDNA array while satisfying a constant need for ribosomes remains unclear.  Here we show that the downregulation of Pol I by the conserved cell cycle kinase Rio1 spatiotemporally coordinates rDNA transcription, replication and segregation. More specifically, Rio1 activity promotes copy-number stability of the replicating rDNA array by curtailing Pol I activity and by localising the histone deacetylase Sir2, which establishes a heterochromatic state that silences rDNA transcription. At anaphase entry, Rio1 and the Cdc14 phosphatase target Pol I subunit Rpa43 to dissociate Pol I from the 35S rDNA promoter. The rDNA locus then condensates and segregates, thereby concluding the genome transmission process.  Rio1 is involved in ribosome maturation in the cytoplasm of budding yeast and human cells. Additional engagements in the cytoplasm or roles in the nucleus are unknown. Our study describes its first nuclear engagement as a Pol I silencing kinase. This activity may prove highly relevant as dysregulated RNA polymerase I activity has been associated with cancer initiation and proliferation.

DESIGN
ChIP-on-chip analyses were carried out as described in Bermejo R. et al., Meth. Mol. Biol. 582: 103-18 (2009). Labelled probes were hybridized to Affymetrix S.cerevisiae Tiling 1.0 (P/N 900645) arrays and processed with TAS software.

PLATFORM
GPL7250 [Sc03b_MR] Affymetrix GeneChip S. cerevisiae Tiling 1.0R Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

