TITLE
LongSAGE analysis in skeletal muscle at three prenatal stages in lean and obese pig breeds

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
Obese and lean pig breeds showed obvious phenotypic variations and physiological differences in skeletal muscle growth. Prenatal muscle development programs postnatal performance. In this study we initially conducted full transcriptional profiling of prenatal skeletal muscle from Tongcheng pigs (obese) and Landrace pigs (lean) at 33, 65 and 90 days post coitus (dpc), using long serial analysis of gene expression (LongSAGE).  We subsequently sequenced 317,115 LongSAGE tags and identified 1400 and 1201 differentially expressed transcripts that showed eight expression patterns for Tongcheng and Landrace, respectively.  These two breeds had more significant differences in their gene expression profiles at 65 than that at 33 and 90 dpc.  We also identified 532, 653 and 459 transcripts that were differentially expressed at 33, 65 and 90 dpc between the two breeds, respectively. The cellular function of the differentially expressed transcripts that matched annotated genes revealed that each stage had a uniquely altered profile between the two breeds in various functional categories including muscle fiber constitute and contraction, apoptosis, protein synthesis, and signalling transduction. Our results suggest that skeletal muscle development potentially has a greater lag in its growth rate at 33-65 dpc in Tongcheng pigs when compared with their Landrace counterparts.  Our analyses therefore not only will provide valuable resources in the further identification of candidate genes for meat production traits, but also assist in the elucidation of the development of prenatal skeletal muscle in pigs and other vertebrates. Keywords: comparative transcriptome analysis

DESIGN
Three Tongcheng and Landrace sows were mated with the same boar of each corresponding breed, respectively.  The sows were then sacrificed at a commercial slaughterhouse and the uteri containing the embryos were collected immediately.  The longissimus muscle tissues were then rapidly dissected from each of the embryos at 33, 65 and 90 dpc for both the Tongcheng and Landrace pigs.  These samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further use in the LongSAGE experiments. For the skeletal muscles from the six different samples, that is, Tongcheng (T33, T65 and T90, respectively) and Landrace (L33, L65 and L90, respectively), equal quantities of total RNA from each individual (n=4) were pooled. Six LongSAGE libraries were subsequently generated using I-SAGETM Long kits (Invitrogen, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Transforming clones were sequenced with the help of an ABI PRIZM 3730 DNA sequencer.

PLATFORM
GPL4061 SAGE:17:NlaIII:Sus scrofa

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

