TITLE
CCR-5 using HIV-1 induces an anti-inflammatory profile in primary macrophages

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Macrophages are important effector cells of the immune system and play an important role in mounting inflammatory responses.  Macrophages can be activated by different stimuli in the tissue, either by cytokines produced by T helper cells (M1 or M2 polarization) or by the pathogens they encounter. Macrophages are also important target cells of HIV-1 and are preferentially infected by CCR5-using viruses. In this study, we investigated the ability of HIV-1 to induce changes in gene expression in unpolarized macrophages as well as in M1 or M2 polarized cells. We observed that CCR5-using HIV-1 regulates the expression of genes that are also regulated by IL-4 in macrophages. Genes regulated by HIV-1 infection and IL-4 polarization are involved in dampening pro-inflammatory responses in macrophages, which may facilitate HIV-1 to escape from detection by other immune cells. We also observed that changes in macrophage gene expression triggered by CCR5-using HIV-1 differed from those regulated by a CXCR4-using virus. This indicates that CCR5-using HIV-1 may be able to modulate macrophage gene expression to achieve successful replication. Our results provide insight in the complex interplay between HIV-1 and cells of the immune system.

DESIGN
Polarized macrophages were obtained by stimulation of primary human monocytes with IFN-gamma (250 U/ml) in combination with TNF-alpha (12.5 ng/ml) (M1), IL-4 (50 ng/ml) (M2a), IL-10 (50 ng/ml) (M2c) for 5 days. Cells were inoculated for 24 hours with one of two HIV-1 strains (CCR5 or CXCR4 using HIV1) or their non replicating counterparts (heat inactivated virus). Macrophages that were not stimulated wiht cyokines or inoculates with HIV-1 were used as control. A total of 16 treatment conditions were tested in triplicate, for a total of 48 samples analysed.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

