TITLE
Whole transcriptome analysis of FACS purified somatosensory neuron subtypes and whole dorsal root ganglia tissue

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The goal of this study was to analyze global gene expression in specific populations of somatosensory neurons in the periphery, including major, non-overlapping populations that include nociceptors, pruriceptors, and prorioceptors. The mammalian somatosensory nervous system encodes the perception of specific environmental stimuli. The dorsal root ganglion (DRG) contains distinct somatosensory neuron subtypes that innervate diverse peripheral tissues, mediating the detection of thermal, mechanical, proprioceptive, pruriceptive, and nociceptive stimuli. We purified discrete subtypes of mouse DRG somatosensory neurons by flow cytometry using fluorescently labeled mouse lines (SNS-Cre/TdTomato, Parv-Cre/TdTomato) in combination with Isolectin B4-FITC surface staining (IB4). This allowed identification of transcriptional differences between these major populations, revealing enrichment of voltage-gated ion channels, TRP channels, G-protein coupled receptors, transcription factors, and other functionally important classes of genes within specific somatosensory neuron subsets.

DESIGN
SNS-Cre mice were bred with Rosa26-TdTomato mice to generate SNS-Cre/TdTomato reporter mice. Parv-Cre mice were bred with Rosa26-TdTomato mice to generate Parv-Cre/TdTomato mice. Isolectin B4-FITC was used to stain the surface of SNS-Cre/TdTomato reporter mice. We used these strategies of fluorescent labeling to purify distinct murine sensory neuron subsets from the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) by fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS). Neurons were sorted directly in Qiazol for total RNA extraction and microarray analysis. Whole DRG tissue was also included for transcriptome analysis to compare with purified neuronal populations.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
25525749

