TITLE
Comparing the samples with and without RNA amplification

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Diverse cell types have unique transcriptional signatures that are best interrogated at single-cell resolution. Here we describe a novel RNA amplification approach that allows for high fidelity gene profiling of individual cells. This technique significantly diminishes the problem of 3’bias and therefore enables detection of all regions of transcripts, including the recognition of mRNA with short or completely absent polyA tails, identification of noncoding RNAs, and discovery of the full array of splice isoforms from any given gene product. We assess this technique using statistical and bioinformatics analysis of microarray data in order to establish the limitations of the method. To demonstrate the applicability of the method, we conducted single cell profiling of individual cells, acutely isolated from the mouse subventricular zone (SVZ) – a well-characterized, discrete yet highly heterogeneous neural structure involved in persistent neurogenesis. Importantly, this method revealed multiple splice variants of key germinal zone gene products, as well as an unexpected coexpression, within individual cells, of several mRNAs that are considered markers of distinct and separate SVZ cell types. These findings were independently confirmed using RNA-FISH, contributing to the utility of this new technology that offers genomic and transcriptomic analysis of small numbers of, in this case, extremely dynamic and clinically relevant cells.

DESIGN
Gene expression ratios between two samples the LN229 glioma cell line (LN) and a collection of human neural stem/progenitor cells (Prog) were compared before and after RNA amplification. Samples without amplification (control sample) - 5 replicates, 20 ng amplification samples - 5 replicates,1ng amplification samples - 5 replicates, 20 pg amplification samples - 6 replicates

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

