TITLE
Pervasive genomic transcription during oxidative stress generates thousands of previously uncharacterized lncRNAs (ChIP-Seq)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Oxidative stress (OS) is caused by an imbalance between pro-oxidant and antioxidant reactions which leads to accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) within cells. ROS can be harmful, due to their damaging effects on several cellular components, but are at the same time essential components of signaling cues. We investigate the effect of OS on the immediate early transcriptional response at a genomic level, by deep sequencing of nuclear and cytosolic RNA fractions, in in human fibroblasts treated for 30 or 120 minutes with sub-lethal doses of H2O2.  In contrast to most of the protein-coding transcriptome, OS induces de novo transient transcription of thousands of previously uncharacterized genomic loci.  We classify these stress induced long non coding RNAs (lncRNA) based on their genomic annotation and strand orientation relative to their nearest gene: distal, overlapping, terminal-associated or promoter-associated. The latter class of stress-induced promoter associated antisense lncRNAs (si-paancRNAs), is preferentially transcribed by PolII, which elongates from bidirectional promoters, enriched for specific transcription factor-binding sites (ZFP161, ZFX, MEF2A and divergent-FOS motives). Interestingly the associated sense-coding genes belong to specific functional categories (cellular response to stress and others). We finally demonstrate that a subset of si-paancRNAs associate better with the translation machinery, which is stalled, upon OS.   Most studies to date have focused on the repertoire of lncRNAs present in physiological conditions. We here report the surprising result that thousands of lncRNAs are transcriptionally upregulated upon OS from specific loci possibly playing a role in physiological or pathological response to stress.

DESIGN
Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled sequencing of 2 histone modifications in BJ (hTert/sT) and total levels of RNA polymerase II after 0, 30 and 120 minutes of treatment with H2O2 in MRC5 cells.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
26024509

LIBSTRATS
:CHIP-SEQ
