TITLE
Complex in vivo RNA-seq analysis  reveal reprogramming of Yersinia from virulent to persistent mode during infection [RNA-seq]

ORGANISM
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis YPIII

SUMMARY
We recently found that Yersinia pseudotuberculosis can be used as a model of persistent bacterial infections. We performed in vivo RNA-seq of bacteria in small cecal tissue biopsies at early and persistent stages of infection to determine strategies associated with persistence. Comprehensive analysis of mixed RNA populations from infected tissues revealed that Y. pseudotuberculosis undergoes transcriptional reprogramming with drastic down-regulation of T3SS virulence genes during persistence when the pathogen resides within the cecum. At the persistent stage, the expression pattern in many respects resembles the pattern seen in vitro at 26oC, with for example up-regulation of flagellar genes and invA. These findings are expected to have impact on future rationales to identify suitable bacterial targets for new antibiotics. Other genes that are up-regulated during persistence are genes involved in anaerobiosis, chemotaxis, and protection against oxidative and acidic stress, which indicates the influence of different environmental cues. We found that the Crp/CsrA/RovA regulatory cascades influence the pattern of bacterial gene expression during persistence. Furthermore, arcA, fnr, frdA, and wrbA play critical roles in persistence. Our findings suggest a model for the life cycle of this enteropathogen with reprogramming from a virulent to an adapted phenotype capable of persisting and spreading by fecal shedding.

DESIGN
Examination of Y. pseudotuberculosis expression in two mouse cecal tissue at early and at persistent infection. Also pure bacterial cultures two at 26C and two 37C. Additionally, the bacterial content of cecal tissue during infections and before infection were analyzed with read mapping on 16SMicrobial NCBI database with non-rRNA-depleted reads.

PLATFORM
GPL18322 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Yersinia pseudotuberculosis YPIII)

CITATIONS
25590628

