TITLE
Transcriptomic analysis of the late stages of grapevine (Vitis vinifera cv. Cabernet Sauvignon) berry ripening indicates significant induction of ethylene signaling and flavor pathways in the skin.

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
Background: Grapevine berry, a nonclimacteric fruit, goes through three developmental stages, the last one called the ripening stage, when the berry changes color and dramatically increases in sugar. Flavors derived from terpenoid and fatty acid metabolism develop at the very end of this ripening stage. Whole-genome microarray analysis was used to assess the transcriptomic response of pulp and skin of Cabernet Sauvignon berries in the latter stages of ripening between 22 and 37 °Brix.  Grapevine berry, a nonclimacteric fruit, goes through three developmental stages, the last one called the ripening stage, when the berry changes color and dramatically increases in sugar. Flavors derived from terpenoid and fatty acid metabolism develop at the very end of this ripening stage. Whole-genome microarray analysis was used to assess the transcriptomic response of pulp and skin of Cabernet Sauvignon berries in the latter stages of ripening between 22 and 37 °Brix. Results: There were approximatedly 18,000 transcripts whose abundance changed with °Brix level and tissue type. There were very broad changes in many gene ontology (GO) categories involving metabolism, signaling and abiotic stress. GO categories reflecting tissue differences were overrepresentation in photoysynthesis, isoprenoid metabolism and pigment biosynthesis. A more detailed analysis of the interaction of the skin and pulp with °Brix levels revealed that there were significantly higher abundances of transcripts changing with °Brix level in the skin that were involved in ethylene signaling, isoprenoid and fatty acid metabolism. Many of these transcripts were peaking around the optimal fruit stage for flavor production. The transcript abundance of approximately two-thirds of the AP2/ERF Superfamily of transcription factors changed during these developmental stages. The transcript abundance of a unique clade of ERF6-type transcription factors had the largest changes and clustered with other genes involved in ethylene, senescence, and fruit flavor production including ACC oxidase, terpene synthases, and lipoxygenases. The transcript abundance of other important transcription factors (i.e. SPL, RIN, etc.) involved in the regulation of fruit ripening was also higher in the skin. Conclusions: A detailed analysis of the transcriptomic response of grapevine berries revealed that these berries went through massive changes in chemical signaling and metabolism in both the pulp and skin, particularly in the skin. The ethylene signaling pathway of this nonclimacteric fruit was significantly stimulated in the late stages of ripening when the production of transcripts for important flavor and aroma compounds were at their highest. Ethylene transcription factors known to play a role in leaf senescence also appear to play a role in fruit senescence. Ethylene may play a bigger role than previously thought in this non-climacteric fruit.

DESIGN
Vitis vinifera L. cv. Cabernet Sauvignon (clone 8 scion on 1130 Paulsen rootstock) berries were harvested from J. Lohr Vineyards & Wines, Paso Robles, CA, USA. Whole-genome microarray analysis was used to assess the transcriptomic response of pulp and skin of berries in the latter stages of ripening between 22 and 37 °Brix (2008 vintage).

PLATFORM
GPL17894 NimbleGen 090918 Vitus vinifera exp HX12 [090918_Vitus_exp; GENE_CALL_ID version]

CITATIONS
25524329

