TITLE
Global transcriptome analysis of fungal genes affected by a novel antifungal agent KR-72, a 13-(4-isopropylbenzyl)berberine derivative   a 13-(4-isopropylbenzyl)berberine derivative

ORGANISM
Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii H99

SUMMARY
A 13-(4-isopropylbenzyl)berberine derivative (named KR-72) was synthesized and examined for antifungal activities against various human pathogenic fungi. The synthesized compound exhibited remarkably enhanced antifungal activity than berberine and berberrubine. Regardless of the potent antifungal activity of KR-72, its mode of action and the physiological impacts of the drug on fungal metabolism remain elusive. In this study, we performed the DNA microarray-based transcriptome analysis to identify KR-72 responsive genes and employed reverse genetics approaches to characterize their functions in Cryptococcus neoformans, which causes fatal meningoencephalitis in humans. First, KR-72 treatment altered in remodeling of transcriptome profiles in C. neoformans. Genes involved in translation and transcription were mostly upregulated, while those involved in cytoskeleton, intracellular trafficking, lipid and carbohydrate metabolism and energy production were downregulated. Supporting this, KR-72 has a strong synergistic effect with a calcineurin inhibitor FK506, while it has an antagonistic effect with polyene drug. Finally, KR-72 treatment promoted expression of ECM16, NOP14, HSP10, and MGE1, which we proved to be essential for the growth of C. neoformans. Among them, KR-72 mediated induction of MGE1 also appeared to hamper the viability of C. neoformans, potentially through impaired cell cycle or DNA repair system. This study will proposed mode of action for KR-72.

DESIGN
The six slides of Cryptococcus_neoformans 3X20K are used in this analysis, 3 biological replicate experiments are performed, total RNAs are extracted under 2 conditions (with or without treatment of KR-72 with H99 (H99 Wild type strain (Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii serotype A). We use the KR-72 non-treated RNAs from this experiment as a control RNA. We use Cy5 as Sample dye and Cy3 as a control dye.

PLATFORM
GPL18333 Cryptococcus_neoformans 3X20K

CITATIONS
25302492

