TITLE
Early Leptin Intervention Reverses Perturbed Energy Balance Regulating Hypothalamic Neuropeptides in the Pre- and Postnatal Calorie Restricted Offspring

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Pre- and postnatal calorie restriction is associated with postnatal growth restriction,  reduced circulating leptin concentrations and perturbed energy balance. Hypothalamic  regulation of energy balance demonstrates enhanced orexigenic (NPY, AgRP) and  diminished anorexigenic (POMC, CART) neuropeptide expression (PN21) setting the  stage for subsequent development of obesity. Leptin replenishment during the early  postnatal period (PN2-PN8) led to reversing the hypothalamic orexigenic:anorexigenic  neuropeptide ratio at PN21 by only reducing the orexigenic (NPY, AgRP) without  affecting the anorexigenic (POMC, CART) neuropeptide expression. This hypothalamic  effect was mediated via enhanced leptin receptor (ObRb) signaling that involved  increased pSTAT3 but reduced PTP1B. This was further confirmed by an increase in  body weight at PN21 in response to intracerebroventricular administration of antisense  ObRb oligonucleotides (PN2-PN8). The change in the hypothalamic neuropeptide  balance in response to leptin administration caused increased oxygen consumption,  carbon dioxide production and physical activity which resulted in increased milk intake  (PN14) with no change in body weight. This is in contrast to the reduction in milk intake  with no effect on energy expenditure and physical activity observed in controls. We  conclude that pre- and postnatal calorie restriction perturbs hypothalamic neuropeptide  regulation of energy balance setting the stage for hyperphagia and reduced energy  expenditure, hallmarks of obesity. Leptin in turn reverses this phenotype by increasing  hypothalamic ObRb signaling (sensitivity) and affecting only the orexigenic arm of the  neuropeptide balance.

DESIGN
Transcriptional studies have been performed using Affymetrix Rat Gene 1.0 arrays for the following treatment groups, with each group run in duplicate: Day 21 Control saline treatment (Con-s), Day 21 Control leptin treatment (Con-r), Day 21 calorie restriction saline treatment (CR-s), and  Day 21 calorie restriction leptin treatment (CR-l).

PLATFORM
GPL6247 [RaGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Rat Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

