TITLE
RPF-1 transcription factor coordinates expression of developmental genes in inducible HEK293/RPF-1 stable transfectants

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
RPF-1, a transcription factors encoded by POU6F2 gene, appears to be expressed in the developing nervous system and embryonic kidney. We generated a stable HEK/RPF-1 transfectant expressing the protein in a tetracycline (Tet)-dependent induction and addressed the whole transcriptome regulated by RPF-1. We detected a gross alteration of gene expression that is consistent with its occupancy at proximal promoters, and gel retardation assay and promoter-reporter activity, addressing a few target genes, indicated a dependence by RPF-1 of transcriptional response. GO analysis supports a role for this factor in the genetic programs guiding early differentiation of embryonic kidney and neuronal fate.     RPF-1, a transcription factors encoded by POU6F2 gene, appears to be expressed in the developing nervous system and embryonic kidney. We generated a stable HEK/RPF-1 transfectant expressing the protein in a tetracycline (Tet)-dependent induction and addressed the whole transcriptome regulated by RPF-1. We detected a gross alteration of gene expression that is consistent with its occupancy at proximal promoters, and gel retardation assay and promoter-reporter activity, addressing a few target genes, indicated a dependence by RPF-1 of transcriptional response. GO analysis supports a role for this factor in the genetic programs guiding early differentiation of embryonic kidney and neuronal fate. Gene array analysis shows that RPF-1 transcription factor modify the transcriptome of HEK293 cells by regulating a genetic program endowed with developmental programs

DESIGN
Comparison of HEK293 cells induced for RPF-1 expression (Tet-) over uninduced control (Tet+) and Mock cells. RPF-1 cDNA was inserted into the pTRE2puro vector to generate stable Tet-inducible KEK293 transfectants. Upon Tet removal from the medium, HEK/RPF-1 transfectants expressed the transcription factor RPF-1.  Cells were then seeded in 10 cm dishes, cultured for 48 h either in complete medium supplemented with Tet (+) or in Tet-depleted medium (-), harvested, and spun down before RNA isolation. Comparative analysis between HEK/RPF-1 induced (Tet-) and uninduced (Tet+) transfectants allowed us to identify genes transcriptionally regulated by RPF-1. Residual effects on gene expression due to Tet supplementation into culture media was ruled out by comparison with the Mock transfectant.

PLATFORM
GPL6104 Illumina humanRef-8 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
27425396

