TITLE
Gene expression profile of calcified and normal tricuspid aortic valves by RNA sequencing.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Purpose: Calcific aortic valve stenosis (AS) is a fatal disease with currently no medical therapy. Some genes were associated with AS, but the genetic architecture of the disease has yet to be discovered. The objective of this study was to combine genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and gene expression in human valve tissues to identify new susceptibility genes of AS. Methods: A meta-analysis was performed combining the results of two independent GWAS in 474 patients that underwent aortic valve replacement from Quebec city and 486 echocardiography cases from France. The controls consisted of 3,151 publically available individuals of European ancestry. Sixty-nine SNPs selected from the meta-analysis (p < 1 x 10-4) were followed-up for replication in a third cohort of 395 cases and 404 controls. Single marker and gene set association analyses were performed. The mRNA expression levels of susceptibility genes were evaluated in 19 human aortic valves with (n=9) and without (n=10) AS by RNA sequencing. Results: Single marker analysis identified 15 SNPs with p values lower than 1 x 10-6 in the meta-analysis near the FAR2 gene on chromosome 12. At the replication stage, none of these SNPs were confirmed and three other SNPs on chromosomes 2 and 5 reached p < 0.05. Gene set analysis revealed more meaningful association with the calcium signaling pathway enriched for genes mapped to disease-associated SNPs. Genes in this pathway including F2R, GNA14, HTR4, P2RX6, and TNNC1 were found differentially expressed in valves with and without AS. Conclusions: This integrative genomic study identified new AS susceptibility genes expressed in human valve tissue. Moderate but coordinated genetic association and expression patterns were observed for genes implicated in the calcium signaling pathway and may provide new therapeutic targets to treat this frequent and rising life-threatening disease.

DESIGN
Samples of aortic valves were collected from 19 male patients undergoing aortic valve replacement surgery. RNA sequencing was performed using the Illumina Hiseq 2000. Three pairwise comparison among the two kind of valves were made.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
26553695

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
