TITLE
Gene-expression profiles of ovarian cancer regarding its microenvironment

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
PD-L1 suppresses host immunity and promotes tumor growth. We investigated how IFN-γ regulates PD-L1 in the ovarian cancer microenvironment.  In clinical samples, the number of stromal CTLs in peritoneally disseminated tumors was correlated with PD-L1 expression on the tumor cells, and the lymphocyte number was significantly related to the IFN-γ signature score. In mouse models, PD-L1 was induced in peritoneal disseminated tumors, where lymphocytes were prominent, but not in subcutaneous tumors. Depleting IFNGR1 resulted in lower PD-L1 expression and longer survival in peritoneal dissemination model. Injection of IFN-γ into subcutaneous tumors increased PD-L1 expression and tumor size, and PD-L1 depletion abrogated tumor growth. These data suggest that IFN-γ works as a tumor progressor through PD-L1 induction. The source of IFN-γ in ovarian cancer microenvironment and its biological effect to the tumor cells is unclear. The immortalized human ovarian surface epithelial cell line, HOSE-E7/hTERT (HOSE) was treated with IFN-γ and expression microarray analysis was performed, and probes showing significantly higher values in IFN-γ-added group were termed “IFN-γ signature genes (295 probes)”.  We then applied this signature to our ovarian cancer microarray data, which included 75 ovarian cancer clinical samples, by means of ss-GSEA. IFN-γ signature score was strongly correlated to the number of infiltrating CD4-positive or CD8-positive lymphocytes in the tumors. These data suggest that the IFN-γ in the ovarian cancer microenvironment is derived from lymphocytes, and an IFN-γ-rich microenvironment is strongly correlated to a lymphocyte-rich microenvironment.

DESIGN
Genome-wide transcriptional changes in human ovarian cancer tissue were observed in different tumor immunological microenvironment.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
25867264

