TITLE
Gene expression profiling of HPV-negative oropharyngeal cancers and Normal benign uvula, tonsil from European American patients

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Head and neck cancer (HNC) is the fifth most common malignancy worldwide with an annual mortality rate of 200,000. About 90% of HNC can be classified as head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC), of which approximately 75% are attributed to alcohol and tobacco consumption and 25 are associated with human papillomavirus (HPV), predominantly HPV16. HPV-associated OPC have better prognosis and a more favorable response to therapy as compared to HPV-negative tumors. Differences in risk factors, age of presentation, clinical behavior and gene expression profiles indicate that HPV-positive and HPV-negative tumors develop via different molecular mechanisms and are biologically distinct. HPV has been characterized as a risk factor for OPC based on race, life style and sexual behavior, impacting survival outcomes for both African American (AA) and European American (EA) patients. According to some reports, the rate of HPV-associated tumors is much lower in AA patients as compared to EA patients in United States. In general, however, AA males have a higher incidence of HNC than any other racial/gender group, and a mortality rate almost three-fold that observed in EA males. Overall, AA patients tend to present with more HPV-negative OPC and have worse prognosis as compared to both HPV-positive and HPV-negative EA patients. This study aimed to compare the gene expression profiles of HPV-negative oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPC) and normal benign uvula/tonsil tissues from European American patients and determine what biological processes and pathways are affected in HPV-negative OPCs in EA patients. Additional datasets in this study explore gene expression differences in HNC from EA and AA patients.

DESIGN
ANALYSIS 8: Two-condition, one-color experiment:  European American (EA) HPV-negative oropharyngeal tumor samples and  normal benign uvula/tonsil tissues. Biological replicates:  8 EA HPV active samples and 4 EA Normal samples.

PLATFORM
GPL17077 Agilent-039494 SurePrint G3 Human GE v2 8x60K Microarray 039381 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
25899179

