TITLE
Gene expression profiling of HPV-active,  HPV-inactive and HPV-negative oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Approximately 25% of all head and neck cancers (HNC), and up to 60% of oropharyngeal cancers (OPC) are associated with human papillomavirus (HPV), predominantly HPV16. HPV-associated OPC have better prognosis and a more favorable response to therapy as compared to HPV-negative tumors. Viral oncoproteins are capable of transforming primary human keratinocytes from either genital or oral epithelia in vitro and most likely play the same role in vivo, by disrupting cell-cycle regulatory pathways leading to a genetic progression to ano-genital cancer and OPC. However, the precise mechanisms by which HPV mediates malignant transformation of keratinocytes in the upper digestive tract epithelia are not entirely clear.  HPV E7-mediated inactivation of pRb results in overexpression of p16INK4A, which is commonly used as a clinical surrogate marker for HPV positivity/activity. However, high p16INK4A alone has insufficient sensitivity and specificity as a biomarker of HPV positivity in different mucosal sub-sites  of HNC. Therefore, increasing emphasis is being placed on the assessment of viral load and E7 oncogene expression, resulting in further classification of HPV positive OPC as HPV-active and HPV-inactive. Differences in risk factors, age of presentation, clinical behavior and gene expression profiles indicate that HPV-positive and HPV-negative tumors develop via different molecular mechanisms and are biologically distinct. This study aimed to compare the gene expression profiles of HPV-active, -inactive and -negative OPC and determine their biological differences.

DESIGN
ANALYSIS 1: Three-condition, one-color experiment: HPV-active, HPV-inactive and HPV-negative oropharyngeal tumor samples. Biological replicates: 12 HPV Active tumors, 8 HPV Inactive tumors and 16 HPV Negative tumors.

PLATFORM
GPL17077 Agilent-039494 SurePrint G3 Human GE v2 8x60K Microarray 039381 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
25899179

