TITLE
Gene profiling during symbiosis between the actinorhizal tree Casuarina glauca and the actinobacteria Frankia CcI3 after treatment with 1-naphtoxy acetic acid, an auxin influx inhibitor.

ORGANISM
Casuarina glauca

SUMMARY
Casuarina glauca belongs to a family of angiosperms called actinorhizal plants because they can develop nitrogen-fixing nodules in association with the soil bacteria Frankia. The aim of this transcriptomic study was to study the role of the plant growth regulator auxin during actinorhizal symbiosis and to identify  key plant genes that are involved in auxin signaling during symbiosis in C. glauca. Symbiosis between C. glauca and Frankia was obtained after inoculation of young plant with a concentrated culture of the bacteria. Inoculation was performed in a medium depleted in nitrogen (N2) which favors the induction of nitrogen fixing symbiosis. For auxin role study, plant were treated with 25µM 1-naphtoxy acetic acid (1-NOA) all along nodulation time. Nodule were harvested 3 weeks after inoculation. For this study we considered two stages:  -  21 days old nodules obtained on plants not treated with 1-NOA (control condition)    - 21 days old nodules obtained on plants supplemented with 25µM of 1-NOA.   Three biological replicates were used for each condition, however due to non valid staistics, two of the replicates (one for control condition, one for treated condition were removed.

DESIGN
Microarrays were designed by Imaxio (Clermont Ferrand, France ; http://www.imaxio.com/index.php ) which has been accredited by Agilent Technologies (Palo Alto, CA, USA; http://www.home.agilent.com/agilent/home.jspx ) as a certified service provider for microarray technologies. Based on 14327 annotated unigenes for C. glauca, 60mers probes were designed using eArray software (1 probe per unigene) and custom 8 x 15K Oligo Microarrays were manufactured by Agilent.

PLATFORM
GPL18375 020940_IRD_RHIZO-CASUARINA-15K-V1.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

