TITLE
Infiltrating monocyte-derived macrophages and resident kupffer cells display different ontogeny and functions in acute liver injury

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Molecular profiling of infiltrating monocyte-derived macrophages versus resident kupffer cells following acute liver injury The liver has a remarkable capacity to regenerate after injury; yet, the role of macrophages (MF) in this process remains controversial mainly due to difficulties in distinguishing between different MF-subsets. Here, we utilized a murine model of acute liver injury caused by overdose of acetaminophen (APAP) and defined three distinct MF subsets that populate the liver following injury. Accordingly, resident Kupffer cells (KC) were significantly reduced upon APAP-challenge and started recovering by self-renewal at resolution phase without contribution of circulating Ly6Chi monocytes. The latter were recruited in a CCR2 and M-CSF mediated pathway at the necro-inflammatory phase and differentiated into ephemeral Ly6Clo MF subset at resolution phase. Moreover, their inducible ablation resulted in impaired recovery. Microarray based molecular profiling uncovered high similarity between steady state KC and those recovered at the resolution phase. In contrast, KC and monocyte-derived MF displayed distinct pro-restorative genetic signature at the resolution phase. Finally, we show that infiltrating monocytes acquire a pro-restorative polarization manifested by unique expression of pro-angiogenesis mediators and genes involved with inhibition of neutrophil activity and recruitment and promotion of their clearance. Collectively, our results present a novel phenotypic, ontogenic and molecular definition of liver-MF compartment following acute injury.

DESIGN
11 Samples (arrays) were performed. We generated pairwise comparison between all the different macrophages stages, using Partek Genomics Suite. Genes with p≤5%[FDR] and a fold-change difference of  ≥2 or < -2 were selected.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
24890723

