TITLE
Differential gene expression is not correlated to age-related vascular pathology in aorta and mesenteric artery of Brown Norway and Fischer344xBrown Norway rats

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Novel genetic pathways associated with successful and/or unsuccessful vascular aging Customized therapies for vascular disease will require matching the vessel type and genetic background of the patient. Our previous studies showed that progressive age-related vascular pathology is strain specific in the thoracic aorta (TA) and mesenteric arteries (MA) of the Brown Norway (BN) and the Fisher344/Brown Norway F1 hybrid (F1) rats. The purpose of this study was to identify novel genetic pathways associated with successful and/or unsuccessful vascular aging.  TA and MA were collected from anesthetized 6, 15 and 24 month old age-matched F1 and BN rats for total RNA isolation. The gene microarrays were generated using the Affimetrix GeneChip Rat Expression 230A Array. Gene expression data was analyzed with the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis and proprietary software. Despite more pronounced age-related vascular pathology in the F1 strain, more genes were differentially expressed in the BN strain during aging. A sample of common key genes (KLB1, TRIO, HLA-C and PCP4) showed similar expression at 6 and 15 months and downregulation at 24 months in F1 vs. upregulation in BN rats. Among the top 50 canonical pathways there was only a 10 and 30% overlap, respectively, between the F1 and BN strains in MA and TA. Most of the overexpressed molecules associated with the same vascular-related biological functions are different between strains. The data suggest that age-related vascular pathology and decrement in function is both strain and vessel-dependent and different genetic programs could be employed to accomplish both normal and pathological physiological processes in conduit and resistance arteries.

DESIGN
two strains: two vessel types, 3 different ages

PLATFORM
GPL1355 [Rat230_2] Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

