TITLE
Genome-wide analysis of gene expression in endothelial colony forming cells and mature endothelial cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Autologous endothelial cells are promising alternative angiogenic cell sources in trials of therapeutic vasculogenesis; in the treatment of vascular diseases and in the field of tissue engineering. A population of endothelial cells (ECs) with long-term proliferative capability can be isolated from human peripheral blood. They are called endothelial colony forming cells (ECFCs), and are considered to be an endothelial precursor population. They can be expanded in cell factories to sufficient numbers for clinical applications, but as the number of isolated primary ECs is low, the culture period required may be quite long. Another EC population that is easily available in the autologous setting and may be expanded in vitro through several population doublings are the ECs from adipose tissue (AT-ECs). Through extensive comparisons using whole-genome microarray analysis, morphology, phenotype and functional assays, we wanted to evaluate the potential of these EC populations for use in clinical neovascularization. Global gene expression profiling of ECFCs, AT-ECs and the classical EC population, human umbilical vein ECs showed that the EC populations clustered as unique populations, but very close to each other. By cell surface phenotype and vasculogenic potential in vitro and in vivo we also found the ECFCs to be extremely similar to AT-ECs. These properties, and easy access in the autologous setting, suggest that both AT-ECs and ECFCs may be useful in trials of therapeutic neovascularization. However, AT-ECs may be a more practical alternative for obtaining large quantities of autologous ECs.

DESIGN
Endothelial colony forming cells (ECFCs), adiose tissue-derived endothelial cells (AT-ECs), dermal microvascular endothelail cells (DMVECs) and umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were cultured in the same medium (EGM-2) for the comparative gene expression studies. RNA samples were obtained from each cell type from three healthy donors representing three biological replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
26669908

