TITLE
Fig and fig wasp mutualism

ORGANISM
Ficus obtusifolia

SUMMARY
A striking property of the ancient and obligate mutualism between figs and their pollinating wasps is that fig wasps consistently oviposit in the inner flowers of the fig syconium (gall flowers, which develop into galls that house developing larvae), but typically do not use the outer ring of flowers (seed flowers, which develop into seeds). To better understand differences between gall and seed flowers that might influence oviposition choices, and the unknown mechanisms underlying gall formation, we used a metatranscriptomic approach to analyze eukaryotic gene expression within fig flowers at the time of oviposition choice and early gall development. Consistent with the unbeatable seed hypothesis, which posits that only a portion of fig flowers are physiologically capable of responding to gall induction or supporting larval development, we found significant differences in gene expression assigned to defense and metabolism between gall- and seed flowers in receptive syconia. Transcripts assigned to flavonoids and defense were especially prevalent in receptive gall flowers, and carbohydrate metabolism was significantly up-regulated relative to seed flowers. In turn, high expression of the venom gene icarapin during wasp embryogenesis within galled flowers distinguishes it as a candidate gene for gall initiation. In response to galling, the fig significantly up-regulates the expression of chalcone synthase, which previously has been connected to gall formation in other plants. This study simultaneously evaluates the gene expression profile of both mutualistic partners in a plant-insect mutualism and provides evidence for a stability mechanism in the ancient fig-fig wasp association.

DESIGN
We examined two different Ficus flower types at two different time points. Each sample contained a pool of hundreds of individual flowers from multiple sycomia.

PLATFORM
GPL18394 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Ficus obtusifolia)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

