TITLE
A genome-wide transcriptome analysis reveals diverse roles of two-component system DraR-K in physiological and morphological differentiation of Streptomyces coelicolor

ORGANISM
Streptomyces coelicolor

SUMMARY
A novel two-component system (TCS) DraR-K was identified previously to play a differential role in antibiotic biosynthesis (ACT, RED and yCPK) of Streptomyces coelicolor M145 on defined minimal medium (MM) conditions. In order to assess whether DraR-K has more global roles, a genome-wide transcriptomic analysis of the wild-type strain M145 and ∆draR-K under the condition of 75 mM glutamine-based MM was performed using DNA microarray. The analysis demonstrated that deletion of draR-K led to the differential expression not only of the biosynthetic gene clusters of ACT, RED and yCPK, but also of other six secondary metabolite biosynthetic clusters, revealing the widely differenital regulation of DraR-K on secondary metabolism of S. coelicolor. Besides, a number of primary metabolism-related genes in the ∆draR-K mutant, such as ureA/B/C/D/G/F, pstSCAB operon and chb gene also exhibited altered expression, which might enable the rebalance of C/N/P ratio under the condition of high concentration of Gln. We also observed that expression of many developmental genes (chpA/B/D/E, ramR/S and rdlA/B) was affected as well after draR-K deletion. Furthermore, the direct role of DraR-K on the transcription of several genes, including cdaR (the pathway-specific activator gene for CDA biosynthesis), chb, and pepA/pepA2 (SCO7336/7337, possibly involved in aerial mycelium development) were validated by electrophoresis mobility shift assays (EMSAs). In summary, our transcriptome analyses revealed the global regulation of DraR-K on physiological and morphological differentiation, especially its differential roles on secondary metabolism of S. coelicolor.

DESIGN
The global transcription profiles of M145 and the ∆draR-K mutant was compared using DNA microarray. RNA samples were isolated from these two strains grown on MM supplemented with 75 mM glutamine as the sole nitrogen source at three time points, 36, 48 and 60 h.

PLATFORM
GPL11371 Agilent-020912 Streptomyces coelicolor 15K

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

