TITLE
Effect of lymphotoxin beta receptor blockade on microRNA expression in the spleen [ExiqonMicroRNA]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Follicular dendritic cells (FDC) are important stromal cells within the B cell follicles and germinal centres (GC) of secondary lymphoid tissues.  FDC trap and retain native antigens on their surfaces in the form of immune complexes which they display to B cells, in order to select those cells with the highest antigen affinity.  MicroRNAs are short, non-coding RNAs of approximately 18-25 nucleotides in length that regulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level by repressing the translation of target genes.  In the current study in vivo and in vitro systems were used to identify microRNAs that are differentially expressed as a result of FDC depletion.   Constitutive lymphotoxin-β receptor (LTβR) stimulation is required to maintain FDC in their differentiated state.  We show that the rapid de-differentiation of spleen FDC that followed LTβR-blockade, coincided with a significant decrease in the expression of mmu-miR-100-5p, mmu-miR-138-5p and mmu-miR-2137.  These microRNAs were shown to be expressed in the FDC-like cell line, FL-YB, and specific inhibition of mmu-miR-100-5p significantly enhanced expression of Il6, Ptgs1/2 and Tlr4 in this cell line.  The expression of each of these genes by FDC plays an important role in regulating GC size and promoting high-affinity antibody responses, suggesting that mmu-miR-100-5p may help regulate their expression during GC reactions.

DESIGN
C57BL/6 mice were given a single intravenous injection of 100 µg of LTβR to temporarily deplete their FDC.  At intervals after treatment 4 spleens from each group were harvested and RNA prepared.   For each group samples were pooled into 2 groups of 2 and microRNA expression levels compared.  Spleens from LTb-/- mice were also analysed.  One channel was used for the actual sample, the second channel was used for internal QC reference.

PLATFORM
GPL18398 Exiqon Mouse miRCURY 6th generation LNA microRNA array [Condensed ProbeID Version]

CITATIONS
24944008

