TITLE
Expression data from chemically-induced skin papillomas (benign tumours)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) have been reported in various cancers including skin squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). The molecular mechanisms regulating tumour initiation and stemness are still poorly characterized. Here, we found that Sox2, a transcription factor expressed in various types of embryonic and adult stem cells (SCs), was the most upregulated transcription factor in CSCs of squamous skin tumours. Sox2 is absent in normal epidermis and begins to be expressed in the vast majority of mouse and human pre-neoplastic skin tumours and continues to be expressed in a heterogeneous manner in invasive mouse and human SCCs. In contrast to other SCCs, in which Sox2 is frequently genetically amplified, the expression of Sox2 in mouse and human skin SCCs is transcriptionally regulated. Conditional deletion of Sox2 in the mouse epidermis dramatically decreases skin tumour formation following chemical induced carcinogenesis. Using Sox2-GFP knockin mice, we showed that Sox2 expressing cells in invasive SCC are greatly enriched in tumour propagating cells (TPCs) that further increase upon serial transplantations.  Lineage ablation of Sox2 expressing cells within primary benign and malignant SCCs leads to tumour regression, consistent with the critical role of Sox2 expressing cells in tumour maintenance. Conditional Sox2 deletion in pre-existing skin papilloma and SCC leads to their regression and decreases their ability to be propagated upon transplantation into immunodeficient mice, supporting the essential role of Sox2 in regulating CSC functions. Transcriptional profiling of Sox2-GFP expressing CSC and upon Sox2 deletion uncovered a gene network regulated by Sox2 in primary tumour cells in vivo. Chromatin immunoprecipitation identified several direct Sox2 target genes controlling tumour stemness, survival, proliferation, adhesion, invasion, and paraneoplastic syndrome. Altogether, our study demonstrates that Sox2, by marking and regulating the functions of skin tumour initiating cells and CSCs, establishes a continuum between tumour initiation and progression in primary skin tumours. We used microarrays to profile tumour epithelial cells upon Sox2 deletion to uncover a gene network regulated by Sox2 in primary tumour cells in vivo.

DESIGN
Microarray analysis was performed on FACS isolated Epcam+ a6+ TECs from 3 different biological experiments following TAM administration to K14CREER:SOX2fl/fl and control mice. Total RNA was analysed using Mouse whole genome 430 2.0 array from Affymetrix.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
24909994

