TITLE
Role of calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase type IV in podocyte function in lupus nephritis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Kidney podocytes and their slit diaphragms contribute to prevent urinary protein loss. T cell from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus display increased expression of calcium/calmodulin kinase IV (CaMKIV).  Here we evaluated the functional role of CaMKIV in lupus nephritis (LN) using kidney biopsy specimens and human podocyte cell line (AB8/13). We found that exposure of podocytes to IgG from LN patients resulted in entry of IgG into the cytoplasm. CaMKIV expression was found to be increased in podocytes of LN kidney biopsy specimens and exposure to IgG from LN patients. IgG entered podocytes using the FcRn receptor because when podocytes where treated with FcRn siRNA less IgG was found in the cytoplasm. The DNA microarray studies of podocytes exposed to LN IgG revealed that genes that are related to the activation of immune cells or podocyte damage were upregulated. These genes included CD86, CaMKIV, PTPN22, PDE5A, CD47 and MALT1.   Interestingly, CD86 expression decreased after silencing CaMKIV in podocytes. Also, in situ hybridization experiments showed that the expression of CD86 was reduced in podocytes from MRL/lpr.camkiv−/− mice. IgG from LN patients may enter podocytes through the FcRn and causes the upregulation of a distinct set of genes which may alter podocyte function.  Upregulation of CaMKIV appears to precede that of genes known to be linked to podocyte damage such as CD86.  These findings may indicate that inhibition of CaMKIV may prove of clinical use in patients with LN.

DESIGN
IgG Purification Kits (Dojindo Molecular Technologies, Inc.) are used for isolation and purification of immunoglobulin G of healthy and normal individual according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Flow through the column was used for non IgG binding samples. Cultured human podocytes with IgG purified from sera of normal individuals and LN patient for 24 hr were collected for RNA.

PLATFORM
GPL2895 GE Healthcare/Amersham Biosciences CodeLink Human Whole Genome Bioarray

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

