TITLE
Colorectal cancer cell lines are representative models of the main molecular subtypes of primary cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Human colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines are a used widely-used to model system for investigation investigate of tumour biology, experimental therapytherapeutic and biomarkers discovery. However, to what extent these established CRC cell lines represent and maintain the genetic diversity of primary cancers is uncertain. In this study, we analyzed 70 CRC cell lines were analysed for mutations using whole exome sequencing and DNA copy-number using by whole-exome sequencing and SNP microarray profilings, respectively. Presence of gGene expression was defined using RNA-Seq. Data from cellCell line datas were was compared to those that published from for primary CRCs published by in The the Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Notably, we found that The spectrum of exome mutations and DNA copy-number aberrations spectra in 70 CRC cell lines closely resembled those seen inat of primary colorectal tumours. Similarities included the presence of at least two hypermutation phenotypes, as defined by signatures of for defective DNA mismatch repair and DNA polymerase ε (POLE) proof-reading deficiency, and along with concordant mutation profiles in the broadly altered WNT, MAPK, PI3K, TGFβ and p53 pathways. In additionFurther, we documented mutations were enriched in genes involved in chromatin remodelling (ARID1A, CHD6, SRCAP) and histone methylation or acetylation (ASH1L, EP300, EP400, MLL2, MLL3, PRDM2, TRRAP). Chromosomal instability was prevalent in non-hypermutated cases, with similar patterns of whole, partial and focal chromosomal aberrations and overlapping significant minimal regions ofchromosomal gains and losses. While paired cell lines derived from the same tumour were found to exhibited considerable mutation and DNA copy-number differences, in silico simulations suggest that these differenceslargely mainly reflected a pre-existing heterogeneity in the tumour cells heterogeneity. In conclusion, our results establish that human CRC lines are representative of the main subtypes of primary tumours at the genomic level, further validating underscoring their utility as tools for to investigating investigate CRC biology and drug responses.

DESIGN
69 colorectal cancer cell lines were analysed for DNA copy number profiles.

PLATFORM
GPL8887 Illumina Human610-Quad v1.0 BeadChip

CITATIONS
24755471

