TITLE
Analysis  of transcriptomic diversitification of developing cumulus and mural granulosa cells in mouse ovarian follicles

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Cumulus cells and mural granulosa cells (MGCs) are spatially and functionally distinct cell types in antral follicles: cumulus cells contact the oocyte and most MGCs contact the basal lamina. For transcriptomic analyses, both cell types were collected from small and large antral follicles, before and after stimulation of immature mice with eCG, respectively. Both cell types underwent dramatic transcriptomic changes and the differences between them became greater with follicular growth. Although cumulus cells of both stages of follicular development are competent to undergo expansion in vitro, they were otherwise remarkably dissimilar with transcriptomic changes quantitatively equivalent to those of MGCs. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis showed that cumulus cells of small follicles were enriched in transcripts generally associated with catalytic components of metabolic processes while those from large follicles were involved in regulation of metabolism, cell differentiation, and adhesion. Upon contrasting cumulus cells versus MGCs, cumulus cells were enriched in transcripts associated with metabolism and cell proliferation while MGCs were enriched for transcripts involved in cell signaling and differentiation.

DESIGN
Cumulus cell-oocyte complexes (COCs) were isolated from the ovaries of 22-day-old B6SJLF1 mice that were either not stimulated with eCG or stimulated by IP injection of 5 IU equine chorionic gonadotropin 44 hours before obtaining the COCs. Only COCs completely enclosed by tightly packed cumulus oophorus were selected for analysis. Cumulus cells were stripped from oocytes by drawing them into a fine glass pipet with a diameter slightly smaller than the diameter of the oocytes, which were discarded. At the same time as collection of COCs, clumps of healthy MGCs having a rusty rather than brown color, which would indicated a less than healthy phenotype, were collected. Both cumulus cells and MGCs were lysed and prepared for micro-array. The cumulus cells from 200 COCs and a roughly equivalent mass of MGCs were collected from three groups of five pooled mice. Thus there were three biological replicates of each sample.

PLATFORM
GPL18416 [Mouse430_2_ENST_13.0.0] Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array [Brainarray Version 13]

CITATIONS
25376232

