TITLE
Gene expression analysis in Jatropha curcas under drought stress and recovery

ORGANISM
Jatropha curcas

SUMMARY
Jatropha is known for its ability to grow in marginal lands and drought prone areas receiving limited amounts of rainfall. Accordingly, gene discovery in Jatropha will be useful for providing a source of genetic information for the improvement of drought tolerance in crops. In this study, a Jatropha oligomicroarray was developed to evaluate the gene expression profile of Jatropha plants during drought stress response and recovery from stress. When the gene expression patterns were compared between those differentially expressed during exposure to drought stress and re-watering, it was possible to identify 333 genes that are involved in the response to dehydration, while 592 genes were found to be significant during recovery, and 375 genes are associated in both dehydration and recovery. Furthermore, representative genes from the three gene categories were compared to those found in other plant species and a basic understanding on how Jatropha copes with drought and its mechanism for survival in dry conditions is discussed. Taken together, the oligomicroarray that we developed in this study is a useful tool for analyzing expression profiles of Jatropha genes to better understand molecular mechanism underlying drought stress responses as well as other aspects of molecular studies in Jatropha.

DESIGN
All plants were given equal amounts of water every two days. For drought stress treatment, one-month old seedlings were used. Control plants were continuously given equal amounts of water while the drought-treated plants were withheld from watering. After three weeks without watering, leaf tissues were collected from drought-treated plants for isolation of total RNA. Three independent experiments with three biological samples each were simultaneously carried out.

PLATFORM
GPL18415 Agilent-045089 Genotypic custom Jatropha 4x44k GE Array 045087

CITATIONS
Cartagena JA, Seki M, Tanaka M, Yamauchi T, Sato S, Hirakawa H, Tsuge T. (2014) Gene expression profiles in Jatropha under drought stress and during recovery. Plant Mol Biol Rep 10/2014; http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11105-014-0815-0

