TITLE
System responses to equal doses of photosynthetically usable radiation of blue, green, and red light in the marine diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum.

ORGANISM
Phaeodactylum tricornutum

SUMMARY
We have studied the transcriptional, metabolic and photo-physiological responses to light of different spectral quality in the marine diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum through time-series studies of cultures exposed to equal doses of photosynthetically usable radiation of blue, green and red light. The experiments showed that short-term differences in gene expression and profiles are mainly light quality-dependent. Transcription of photosynthesis-associated nuclear genes was activated mainly through a light quality-independent mechanism likely to rely on chloroplast-to-nucleus signaling. In contrast, genes encoding proteins important for photoprotection and PSII repair were highly dependent on a blue light receptor-mediated signal. Changes in energy transfer efficiency by light-harvesting pigments were spectrally dependent; furthermore, a declining trend in photosynthetic efficiency was observed in red light. The combined results suggest that diatoms possess a light quality-dependent ability to activate photoprotection and efficient repair of photodamaged PSII. In spite of approximately equal numbers of PSII-absorbed quanta in blue, green and red light, the spectral quality of light is important for diatom responses to ambient light conditions.

DESIGN
Continuous, axenic culturing of P. tricornutum was done as described in Nymark et al. (2009). The cultures were incubated at 15°C under cool white fluorescent light (Philips TLD 36W/96) providing a scalar irradiance (EPAR) of 100 μmol m-2 s-1 under continuous white light (CWL) conditions. Upon the onset of the experiment the cultures were synchronized by 48 h dark-treatment (D48). Thereafter the algae were exposed to blue light (BL), green light (GL) or red light (RL) provided by a waveband specific LED panel (SL3500, Photon Systems Instruments). The algae were exposed to 0.5 h, 6 h or 24 h of: 1) 230 μmol m-2 s-1 of RL, 2) 100 μmol m-2 s-1 of GL, 3) 50 μmol m-2 s-1 of BL or 4) 100 μmol m-2 s-1 of WL respectively. Three biological replicas for each of the treatments were harvested. Data for the white light exposure and 48h dark treatment is described in GSE42039, PMID: 23520530.

PLATFORM
GPL7021 ENS Phaeodactylum tricornutum 44k_v1.0

CITATIONS
25470731

