TITLE
Cell cycle-independent temporal identity transitions in cortical progenitor cells as revealed by single cell transcriptome analysis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
During cerebral development, a variety of neurons are sequentially generated by self-renewing progenitor cells, apical progenitors (APs). A temporal change in AP identity is thought to produce a diversity of progeny neurons, while underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. Here we performed single cell genome-wide transcriptome profiling of APs at different neurogenic stages, and identified a set of genes that are temporally expressed in APs in a manner independent of differentiation state. Surprisingly, the temporal pattern of such AP gene expression was not affected by arresting cell cycling. Consistently, a transient cell cycle arrest of APs in vivo did not prevent descendant neurons to acquire their correct laminar fates. in vitro cell culture of APs revealed that transitions in AP gene expression involved in both cell-autonomous and non-autonomous mechanisms. These results suggest that timers controlling AP temporal identity run independently of cell cycle progression and Notch activation mode.　

DESIGN
We randomly picked up single cells from dorso-lateral portion of cerebral wall of a CD1 mouse at E11, E12 or small VZ/SVZ fragments of the same portion at E14 (3 days after in vivo electroporation of pCAG-NICD and pEF-p18) and E16. In 3 cases, cells are picked up from 3-days-in-vitro neurospheres derived from E11 dorso-lateral portion of cerebral wall. Single-cell cDNA samples were generated and amplified as descibed (Kurimoto et al.Nucreic Acid Res.34:e42, 2006).  After checking the quality of the samples, we then chose 30 (E11), 3 (APs from E12), 28 (E16), 4 (E14, NICD+p18 overexpressed APs), and 3 (APs from 3 days-in-vitro neurosphere) samples and applied them to GeneChip analysis.  We then performed analysis with these samples in addition to previously obtained data with E14 samples, which were deposited to GEO as GSE10881.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
27094546

