TITLE
What makes the blood cell-based miRNome disease specific? -  miRNA analysis of leukocyte subsets in lung cancer patients and  controls

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: There is ample evidence of blood-born miRNA signatures for various  human diseases. To dissect the origin of disease-specific miRNA expression in  human blood cells, we separately analyzed the miRNome of eosinophilic and  neutrophilic granulocytes, monocytes, B-cells, T-cells, and natural killer cells, each in  lung cancer patients and healthy individuals.  Results: We found specific miRNA expression patterns for each immune cell type and  also depending on the cell origin, line of defense, and function. The overall  expression pattern of each leukocyte subtype showed great similarities between lung  cancer patients and healthy controls. However, for each cell subtype we identified  miRNAs that were deregulated in lung cancer patients including hsa-miR-21, a well-  known oncomiR associated with poor lung cancer prognosis that was up-regulated in  all subtype comparisons of lung cancer versus controls. While the miRNome of cells  of the adaptive immune system allowed only a weak separation between patients and  controls, cells of the innate immune system allowed perfect or nearly perfect  classification.  Conclusions: Leukocytes of lung cancer patients show a cancer-specific miRNA  expression profile. Our data also show that cancer specific miRNA expression pattern  of whole blood samples are not determined by a single cell type. The data indicate  that additional blood components, like erythrocytes, platelets, or exosomes might  contribute to the disease specificity of a miRNA signature.

DESIGN
We obtained EDTA and PAXgene blood from 7 healthy subjects and 7 lung cancer patients and isolated the  CD3, CD19, CD15, CD14, and CD56 positive cell fractions from the EDTA blood samples to compare the miRNomes of the cell subsets of healthy individuals versus lung cancer patients.

PLATFORM
GPL16770 Agilent-031181 Unrestricted_Human_miRNA_V16.0_Microarray (miRBase release 16.0 miRNA ID version)

CITATIONS
25344866

