TITLE
Homozygosity mapping in family segregating premature ovarian insufficiency (POI)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) is defined as a primary ovarian defect characterized by absent menarche (primary amenorrhea) or premature depletion of ovarian follicles before the age of 40 (secondary amenorrhea) with hypergonadotropism and hypoestrogenism. Premature ovarian insufficiency has few known genetic causes but in familial cases a genetic link is often suspected. A large consanguineous family with three female affected with POI was investigated. All samples including 3 affected and 5 unaffecd underwent whole genome SNP genotyping using Affymetric Axiom_GW_Hu_SNP array. Linkage analysis was carried out using HomozygosityMapper and Allegro softwares.Linkage analysis mapped the disease phenotype to long arm of chromosome 20. Sequence data analysis of potential candidate genes failed to detect any pathogenic variant.

DESIGN
Affymetrix SNP arrays were performed according to the manufacturer's directions on DNA extracted from peripheral blood samples. DNA of eight individuals including three affected subjects was used for homozygosity mapping. Genotyping was performed using the Affymetrix Axiom_GW_Hu_SNP array. Briefly, 250 ng genomic DNA was digested with Digestion Master Mix containing 2 µl NE buffer 2 (10X), 0.5 µl BSA (100X; 10 mg/ml) and 1 µl Nsp1. Digested DNA sample was ligated to Nsp1 adaptor using T4 DNA ligase and amplified by 2 µl of TITANIUM Taq DNA polymerase (50X) and 100 µM PCR primer. PCR products were purified on a Clean-Up plate (Clontech Lab, Madison, USA) and eluted by RB buffer. Purified PCR products were fragmented using Fragmentation Reagent (0.05U/µl DNase 1) for 35 minutes at 37°C followed by labeling of fragmented samples with Labeling Master Mix (30 mM GeneChip DNA Labeling Reagent, 30 U/µl Terminal Deoxynucleotidyl Transferase) for 4 hours at 37°C. Labeled samples were hybridized to Axiom_GW_Hu_SNP array by mixing the sample with Hybridization Master Mix, denatured on thermoblock and loaded on to Array. Array was then placed in a hybridization oven (GeneChip Hybridization Oven 640, USA) for 16-18 hours. After hybridization, array was washed and stained on an automated Fluidic Station 450 followed by scanning on GeneChip Scanner 3000 7G using GeneChip Operating Software (GCOS).

PLATFORM
GPL18441 [Axiom_GW_Hu_SNP] Affymetrix Axiom Genome-Wide CEU 1 Array Plate

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

