TITLE
The effect of bisphenol A on human preadipocyte differentiation.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Exposure to the endocrine-disrupting chemical bisphenol A (BPA) is correlated with obesity and promotes adipogenesis of human preadipocytes into mature adipocytes. However, the mechanism of action of BPA-induced human adipogenesis in vitro remains to be fully characterized. Methods: In this study, potential mechanisms of BPA-induced adipogenesis in primary human preadipocytes were evaluated using gene expression microarray analysis. Preadipocytes from donors with normal body mass indexes were differentiated in the presence of 50 µM BPA or 1 µM dexamethasone (DEX) for 48 hours. Results: Microarray analysis revealed 235 up-regulated and 138 down-regulated genes following BPA treatment, including sterol regulatory element binding factor 1 (SREBF1), a key transcription factor known to regulate many components of lipid metabolism and adipogenesis. For DEX treated preadipocytes, 1136 genes were up-regulated, including the adipogenic marker lipoprotein lipase, while 1031 genes were down-regulated. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis was used to identify functional annotations of the gene expression changes associated with response to BPA and DEX treatments. BPA exposure was associated with expression changes in the genes involved in the accumulation of triacylglycerol while DEX was linked to metabolism of triacylglycerol and cleavage of fatty acids. The analysis also revealed enrichment of genes in pathways known to be associated with BPA exposure including thyroid-receptor/retinoic X receptor (TR/RXR) activation, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling and cholesterol biosynthesis, whereas DEX treatment was linked to cholesterol biosynthesis and ethanol degradation. Interestingly, alterations in the mTOR pathway in response to BPA did not occur in DEX-treated preadipocytes. Conclusions: Our data suggest that potential mechanisms of action of BPA-induced adipogenesis involve SREBF1, the TR/RXR and the mTOR pathways.

DESIGN
The study used 40 samples in total which included 5 replicates (cells from 5 unique donors) of 8 different treatments. The 8 treatments were as follows: 1) untreated (negative) control for 48 hours, 2) 25 uM BPA treated for 48 hours, 3) 50 uM BPA treated for 48 hours, 4) untreated (negative) control + insulin for 48 hours, 5) 25 uM BPA + insulin treated for 48 hours, 6) 50 uM BPA +  insulin treated for 48 hours, 7) 1uM Dexamethasone + insulin treated for 48 hours, 8) 1uM Dexamethasone + insulin treated for 96 hours.

PLATFORM
GPL14550 Agilent-028004 SurePrint G3 Human GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name Version)

CITATIONS
25047013

