TITLE
Differential gene expression patterns in the phosphate deficient mutant, pho 1

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Background: The UK horticultural and agricultural industries routinely apply large amounts of inorganic fertiliser to maintain crop yield and quality, since chemical assays of soil nutrients are unreliable. Excessive fertiliser applications are costly and can lead to unnecessary pollution. A possible solution is to use sensor (GM or non-GM) technologies that exploit the changes in plant gene expression under incipient nutrient deficiency. Aim: The aim of this project is to use mutants with reduced leaf phosphate contents to identify genes upregulated in response to phosphate stress. Preliminary gene expression analysis has identified several phosphate responsive genes to be upregulated in the pho1 mutant. However, further replicates of the experiment are required to confirm these changes. Methods: Arabidopsis mutant pho1 (N8507) and its parent ecotype Columbia 2 (N907) will be grown on MS agar under identical conditions. RNA will be extracted from the rosette leaves of both parent and mutant and the same growth stage. By comparing the expression profiles, we will be able to differentiate between genes that are upregulated in leaves experiencing phosphate stress. Previously, two GeneChips have been used (mutant and parent) to provide preliminary data. A further two biological replicates are now required to confirm these results. Promoters and transcripts of these genes will underpin the development of novel sensor technologies, and knowledge of the gene expression profiles will improve our understanding of the physiology of plant mineral nutrition. Experimenter name = John Hammond Experimenter phone = 01789 470382 Experimenter fax = 01789 470552 Experimenter address = Plant Sciences Division Experimenter address = School of Biosciences Experimenter address = University of Nottingham Experimenter address = Sutton Bonington Campus Experimenter address = Loughborough Experimenter zip/postal_code = LE12 5RD Experimenter country = UK Keywords: genetic_modification_design

DESIGN
6 samples were used in this experiment

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

