TITLE
Expression profile of hsp31∆, hsp32∆, hsp33∆ during diauxic shift

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
The yeast Hsp31 mini-family proteins (Hsp31, Hsp32, Hsp33, Hsp34) belong to the highly conserved DJ-1 superfamily. The human DJ-1 protein is associated with cancer and neurodegenerative disorders, such as Parkinson’s disease. However, the precise function of human and yeast DJ-1 proteins is unclear. Here we show that the yeast DJ-1 homologs have a role in diauxic-shift, characterized by metabolic reprogramming due to glucose limitation. We find that the Hsp31 genes are strongly induced in diauxic-shift and in stationary phase (SP), and that deletion of these genes reduces chronological lifespan, impairs transcriptional reprogramming at diauxic-shift, and impairs the acquisition of several typical characteristics of SP, including autophagy induction. In addition, under carbon starvation, the HSP31 family gene deletion strains display impaired autophagy, disrupted TORC1 localization to P-bodies, and caused abnormal TORC1-mediated Atg13 phosphorylation. Repression of TORC1 by rapamycin in the gene deletion strains completely reversed their sensitivity to heat shock. Altogether, our data indicate that Hsp31 mini-family is required for diauxic-shift reprogramming and cell survival in SP, and plays a role upstream of TORC1. The enhanced understanding of the cellular function of these genes sheds light into the biological role of other members of the superfamily, including DJ-1, which is an attractive target for therapeutic intervention in cancer and in Parkinson’s disease. hsp31∆, hsp32∆, hsp33∆ are compared with its parental strain BY4741. We used One-Color Microarray-Based Gene Expression Analysis Low Input Quick Amp Labeling from Agilent.

DESIGN
Cultures were grown in synthetic complete media until reached diauxic shift. At this time cultures were collected.

PLATFORM
GPL9825 Agilent-016322 Yeast (V2) Gene Expression 8x15K Microarray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
24706893

