TITLE
AtGenExpress: Response to bacterial-(LPS, HrpZ, Flg22) and oomycete-(NPP1) derived elicitors

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
AtGenExpress:  A multinational coordinated effort to uncover the transcriptome of the multicellular model organism Arabidopsis thaliana (Hybridisations done at NASC) The activity of genes and their encoded products can be regulated in several ways, but transcription is the primary level, since all other modes of regulation (RNA splicing, RNA and protein stability, etc.) are dependent on a gene being transcribed in the first place. The importance of transcriptional regulation has been underscored by the recent flood of global expression analyses, which have confirmed that transcriptional co-regulation of genes that act together is the norm, not the exception. Moreover, many studies suggest that evolutionary change is driven in large part by modifications of transcriptional programs. An essential first step toward deciphering the transcriptional code is to determine the expression pattern of all genes. With this goal in mind, an international effort to develop a gene expression atlas of Arabidopsis has been underway since fall 2003. This project, dubbed AtGenExpress, is funded by the DFG, and will provide the Arabidopsis community with access to a large set of Affymetrix microarray data. As part of this collaboration, we have generated expression data from 80 biologicaly different samples in triplicate. Series 2: Base line experiment for pathogen infection. Growth and infection conditions: Seeds will be stratified for 3 days at 4°C and sown on soil. Plants are grown at 22°C under a 8/16 hour light/dark regime in Percival growth chambers. All pathogen treatments will be performed on leaves of 5-weeks old plants. Bacterial infiltrations will be performed with 10-8 cfu/ml in 10 mM MgCl2. 5x105 spores of Phytophthora infestans in water will be applied to leaf surfaces. LPS (100 µg/ml), HrpZ (1 µM), NPP1 (2 µM) or flagellin (1 µM flg22) will be applied in water. Experiments should be performed in triplicate at the time points indicated below. Experimenter name = Frederic Brunner  , Thorsten Nürnberger Experimenter institute = AtGenExpress Keywords: genetic_modification_design;  organism_part_comparison_design; development_or_differentiation_design

DESIGN
42 samples were used in this experiment

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

