TITLE
Comparative transcriptome analysis of wild type and two knockout alleles of At-CAMTA

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Calcium has been shown to be an important signalling molecule in the transduction of abiotic stress signals in Arabidopsis thaliana. Alteration of the calcium signature through the use of inhibitors has been shown to result in changes in the expression of certain downstream abiotic stress-induced genes. However, the communication of this signal through specific calcium-sensitive intermediate molecules has remained poorly elucidated. Various candidate molecules exist and including calcinurin, calcium-dependent protein kinases and calmodulin. Recently, a screen of an Arabidopsis thaliana cDNA expression library with calmodulin resulted in the isolation of the protein designated calmodulin-binding transcriptional activator or AtCAMTA that may function as one of these calcium-sensitive intermediate molecules. The Arabidopsis genome contains six CAMTA genes (AtCAMTA1-6), all of which are expressed in varying tissues throughout development. AtCAMTA1 was shown to function as a transcriptional activator through the expression of a chimeric protein consisting of the bacteria LexA protein fused to various segments of AtCAMTA expressed in yeast. In order to identify putative target genes of AtCAMTA1 in Arabidopsis we plan to analyse the transcriptome of AtCAMTA1 loss-of-function mutants. The gene expression pattern of two previously characterised alleles of AtCAMTA1 will be compared to wild type. Experimenter name = Sarah Scrase-Field Experimenter phone = 01865 275062 Experimenter fax = 01865 275074 Experimenter department = University of Oxford Experimenter address = Department of Plants Sciences Experimenter address = University of Oxford Experimenter address = South Parks Road Experimenter address = Oxford Experimenter zip/postal_code = OX1 3RB Experimenter country = UK Keywords: genetic_modification_design

DESIGN
4 samples were used in this experiment

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

