TITLE
Functional studies of a new Arabidopsis SH2 domain-containing gene

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
The protein modules known as SH2 (Src-homology-2) domains are key players in the signal transduction of animals. Two questions arise: Do such modules exist in plants, and when did SH2 domains evolve? Here I show that the Arabidopsis genome contains three strong candidates for plant SH2 proteins (referred to as PASTA1, 2 and 3 : GI:25513455, At1g78540, At1g17040 respectively) with homology to the SH2 domains and the adjacent linker region of STAT proteins (Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription). The three characteristics features of a STAT protein sequence1, namely, (i) the SH2 domain with a conserved arginine residue crucial for binding to a phospho-tyrosine residue (ii) a tyrosine residue outside the C-terminus of the SH2-domain  for phosphorylation during signalling and (iii) a DNA-binding domain, are conserved in the PASTA3 protein. However, PASTA 1 and 2 proteins lack a tyrosine in a similar position. PASTA proteins are not homologous to STAT proteins outside the SH2 and linker regions. The three PASTA proteins are 70 to 80 % identical to one another. Gene expression studies with PASTA2 reveal that it is expressed in roots, stem, leaves, flowers and green siliques. Preliminary indications are that plants homozygous for PASTA2 do not have any obvious phenotype, most likely due to redundancies. This microarray experiment is an attempt to compare the gene expression of a mutant plant  homozygous for PASTA2 with that of the wild type plant. This might give clues about the possible function of PASTA2 in Arabidopsis. Experimenter name = Latha Kadalayil Experimenter phone = 023-8059 5512 Experimenter department = University of  Southampton Experimenter address = School of Biological Sciences Experimenter address = Univ.  Southampton Experimenter address = Bassett Crescent East Experimenter address = Southampton Experimenter zip/postal_code = SO16 7PX Experimenter country = UK Keywords: genetic_modification_design

DESIGN
2 samples were used in this experiment

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

