TITLE
Yeast versus no yeast nutrition study

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Larvae were reared on standard diet until early third instar, at which time they were washed and transferred to standard diet lacking yeast. The animals remained on this diet until four days after emergence, when one group of adults was switched back to standard diet containing yeast (group Y) while another remained on the diet lacking yeast (group NY). Flies from both groups were killed every hour for the next twelve hours, creating 24 samples across the two treatments. In addition, four samples of flies were killed just before the start of the time course and used as baseline replicates for the no yeast (NY) and yeast (Y) treatments. Baseline replicates were temporally ordered as noted for change-point analysis. No yeast (NY) treatment samples at hours four and eight did not yield microarray data due to insufficient RNA. Total RNA was extracted from whole animals using Trizol (Invitrogen). Sample processing and microarray hybridization/scanning were performed at the Brown University Center for Genetics and Genomics according to Affymetrix protocol. Change-point Analysis Results Table: Results of running change-point analysis on dChip normalized data. Normalized data was transformed into yeast (Y):no yeast (NY) signal ratios, and change-point analysis was performed by GeneTrace on these ratios (see publication for more information on change-point analysis). Raw Data, Not Normalized Table: Raw data (not normalized). Image files were analyzed by Affymetrix Microarray Suite (MAS) 5.0 with no normalization and no scaling. Signal abundance measurements, present [P], marginal [M], or absent [A] calls, and detection p-values reported were all produced by MAS 5.0. Note that there is no data for no yeast (NY) treatment samples at hours 4 and 8 due to insufficient RNA yield. Keywords = insulin, diet, nutrition Keywords: other

PLATFORM
GPL72 [DrosGenome1] Affymetrix Drosophila Genome Array

CITATIONS
17090700

