TITLE
Prefrontal cortex gene expression in WSP and WSR male and female mice following 72h of chronic ethanol vapor exposure

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Ethanol is the most common substance of abuse in the US, and abuse can lead to physical dependence, addiction, brain damage and premature death.  The cycle of alcohol addiction has been described as a composite consisting of three stages: intoxication, withdrawal and craving/abstinence.  As a complex brain disorder, there is evidence for both a genetic contribution to risk and sexually-dimorphic responses in alcoholism, but an overall understanding of the biological contributions and the neuroadaptive underpinnings of alcohol addiction is limited.  Utilizing novel genetic animal models with highly divergent withdrawal severity, Withdrawal Seizure-Resistant (WSR) and Withdrawal Seizure-Prone (WSP) selected lines of mice and by examining both sexes, the distinct or common contributions of response to alcohol genotype/phenotype and of sex to addiction stages over time were characterized.  Transcriptional profiling was performed to identify neuroadaptive changes as a consequence of chronic intoxication in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). Significant expression differences were identified for each line and tracked over a behaviorally-relevant time course that covered each stage of alcohol addiction; i.e., after chronic intoxication, during peak withdrawal, and after a defined period of abstinence.  Females were more responsive to ethanol with higher fold expression differences.  Data structure was analyzed by bioinformatics, which showed a strong effect of sex with high similarity of male vs. female expression profiles during chronic intoxication and at peak withdrawal irrespective of genetic background.  However, during abstinence, striking differences were observed instead between the lines/phenotypes irrespective of sex.  Because sex was the strongest influence on neuroadaptive changes overall, confirmation analysis compared males vs. females.  Notably, results revealed distinct inflammatory signaling between males and females at peak withdrawal, with a pro-inflammatory inflammotoxic phenotype in females but in contrast overall suppression of immune signaling in males. Thus, the early response to chronic intoxication is strongly influenced by sex while pathways that are altered during a period of abstinence are dependent on genotype.  Combined, these results suggest that each stage of the addiction cycle is influenced differentially by sex vs. genetic background and support the development of distinct translational targets for stage- and sex-specific therapies for the treatment of alcohol withdrawal and the maintenance of sobriety.

DESIGN
A total of 32 microarrays were run with 4 biological replicates per treatment, line, and sex.  Selection replicates (i.e. WSP-1 and WSP-2) for each treatment, line, and sex were collapsed to improve statistical power (n=4) and to facilitate in the identification of phenotype related effects and exclude selection artifacts.  For comparisons, EtOH regulation was determined by comparing 4 arrays from (for example) Male WSR EtOH treated versus 4 arrays from Male WSR Air treated arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL10727 GeneFilter Mouse Microarrays Release I (GF400)

CITATIONS
25194791

