TITLE
p53 Enables Self Renewal of Nephron Progenitor Cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
p53 limits the self-renewing ability of a variety of stem cells. Here, contrary to its classical role in restraining cell proliferation, we demonstrate a divergent function of p53 in maintenance of self-renewal of the nephron progenitor population in the embryonic mouse kidney. p53-null nephron progenitor cells (NPC) exhibit progressive loss of the self-renewing progenitor niche in the cap mesenchyme, identified by Cited1 and Six2 expression, and loss of cap integrity. Nephron endowment is regulated by NPC availability and their differentiation to nephrons. Quantitatively, the Six2p53-/- cap has 30% fewer Six2GFP+ cells. While the apoptotic index is unchanged the proliferation index is significantly lower, in accordance with cell cycle analysis data showing less mutant Six2p53-/-;GFP+ cells in S and G2/M phases in comparison to Six2p53+/+;GFP+ cells. The mutant kidneys also show nephron deficit and decreased Fgf8 expression. To investigate the underlying changes in gene expression in the cap mesenchyme that contribute to the Six2p53-/- phenotype, we utilized RNA-Seq for transcriptome comparison.  Top biological processes affected by p53 loss are development and morphogenesis, cell adhesion/migration, cell survival and metabolism. Cells from the mutant CM showed increased cellular ROS levels as well as deregulated expression of energy metabolism and mitochondrial genes suggesting metabolic dysfunction. Adhesion defects are visualized by decreased immunostaining of adhesion marker NCAM, and may possibly contribute to the differentiation defect as well.  Altogether our data suggest a novel role for p53 in enabling self-renewal of the NPC and preservation of the progenitor niche, and thus regulating nephron endowment.

DESIGN
mRNA profiles of wild-type (WT) and conditional p53 knockout (KO) of Six2+ mouse nephron progenitor cells (NPC) at embryonic day 15.5

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
25804735

