TITLE
Gene expression analysis of FOXN1+ thymic endoderm cells derived from the in vitro differentiation of human embryonic stem cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The goal of this study was to document the gene expression profile of FOXN1+ thymic endoderm cells derived from the in vitro differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells. Thymic epithelial cells (TECs) play a critical role in T-cell maturation and tolerance induction. The generation of TECs from in vitro differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) would provide a platform for studying the mechanisms of this interaction and have implications for immune reconstitution. To facilitate analysis of PSC-derived TECs, we generated human embryonic stem cell (hESC) reporter lines in which sequences encoding GFP were targeted to FOXN1, a gene required for TEC development. Using this FOXN1GFP/w line as a read out, we developed a reproducible protocol for generating FOXN1-GFP+ thymic endoderm cells. Transcriptional profiling and flow cytometry identified Integrin-β4 (ITGB4, CD104) and HLA-DR as markers that could be used in combination with EpCAM to selectively purify FOXN1+ TEC progenitors from differentiating cultures of unmanipulated PSCs. Human FOXN1+ TEC progenitors generated from PSCs will facilitate the study of thymus biology and are a valuable resource for future applications in regenerative medicine

DESIGN
Human embryonic stem cells were differentiated for 30 days using the protocol described by Soh et al, 2014. The hESCs used in this protocol had been genetically modified by targeting sequences encoding GFP to the FOXN1 locus, thus enabling FOXN1 expressing cells to be identified on the basis of GFP expression.  At differentiation day 30, differentiating cells were separated into three fractions using FACS. These fractions were the FOXN1+(GFP+)EpCAM+, FOXN1-(GFP-)EpCAM+, FOXN1-(GFP-)EpCAM-.

PLATFORM
GPL6947 Illumina HumanHT-12 V3.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

