TITLE
Negative energy balance and hepatic gene expression patterns in high yielding dairy cows during the early postpartum period [liver]

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
In high yielding dairy cows the liver undergoes extensive physiological and biochemical changes during the early postpartum period in an effort to re-establish metabolic homeostasis and to counteract the adverse effects of negative energy balance (NEB). These adaptations are likely to be mediated by significant alterations in hepatic gene expression. To gain new insights into these events an EB model was created using differential feeding and milking regimes to produce two groups of cows with either a mild (MNEB)  (n=5) or severe NEB (SNEB) (n=6) status. Cows were slaughtered and liver tissues collected on days 6-7 of the first follicular wave postpartum. Using an Affymetrix® 23k oligonucleotide bovine array to determine global gene expression in hepatic tissue of these cows, a total of 416 genes (189 up- and 227 down-regulated) were found to be altered by SNEB. Network analysis using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis revealed that SNEB was associated with widespread changes in gene expression classified into 36 gene networks including those associated with lipid metabolism, connective tissue development and function, cell signalling, cell cycle and metabolic diseases. Severe NEB cows displayed reduced expression of transcription activators and signal transducers that regulate the expression of genes and gene networks associated with cell signalling and tissue repair. These alterations are linked with increased expression of abnormal cell cycle and cellular proliferation associated pathways. This study provides new information and insights on the effect of SNEB on gene expression in high yielding Holstein Friesian dairy cows in the early postpartum period.

DESIGN
Multiparous Holstein-Friesian cows (n=24) were blocked 2 weeks prior to expected calving date according to parity, body condition score, and previous lactation yield (average lactation 6477±354kg) and randomly allocated to mild (MNEB; n=12) or severe (SNEB; n=12) NEB groups. MNEB cows were fed ad lib grass silage and 8 kg day-1 concentrates and milked once daily; SNEB cows were fed 25 kg day-1 silage and 4kg day-1 concentrate and milked three times daily. Measurements of body condition score and EB were used to select cows which showed extremes in EB from each group (MNEB, n=5; SNEB, n=6). Cows were slaughtered on days 6-7 of the first follicular wave after calving (mean number of days post-partum: MNEB mean 13.6 ± 0.75, range 11–15; SNEB mean 14.3 ± 0.56, range 13–16), based on daily transrectal ultrasonography.The entire liver was removed within 15 to 30 min after slaughter and weighed. Samples weighing approximately 1 g were dissected, rinsed in RNase free phosphate buffer, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80ºC.

PLATFORM
GPL18534 [Bovine] Affymetrix Bovine Genome Array [CDF: Affyprobeminer, bovineccdscdf]

CITATIONS
20716645

