TITLE
Negative energy balance and splenic gene expression patterns in high yielding dairy cows during the early postpartum period [spleen]

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
Increased energy demands to support lactation, coupled with lowered feed intake capacity results in negative energy balance (NEB) and is typically  characterized by extensive mobilization of body energy reserves in the early postpartum dairy cow. The catabolism of stored lipid leads to an increase in the systemic concentrations of nonesterified fatty acids (NEFA) and  -hydroxy butyrate (BHB). Oxidation of NEFA in the liver result in the increased production of reactive oxygen species and the onset of oxidative stress and can lead to disruption of normal metabolism and physiology. The immune system is depressed in the peripartum period and early lactation and dairy cows are therefore more vulnerable to bacterial infections causing mastitis and or endometritis at this time. A  bovine Affymetrix oligonucleotide array was used to determine global gene expression in the spleen of dairy cows in the early postpartum period. Spleen tissue was removed post mortem from five severe NEB (SNEB) and five medium NEB (MNEB) cows 15 days postpartum.SNEB increased systemic concentrations of NEFA and BHB, and white blood cell and lymphocyte numbers were decreased in SNEB animals. A total of 545 genes were altered by SNEB. Network analysis using  Ingenuity Pathway Analysis revealed that SNEB was associated with NRF2-mediated oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, endoplasmic reticulum stress, natural killer cell signaling, p53 signaling, downregulation of IL-15, BCL-2, and IFN- ; upregulation of BAX and CHOP and increased apoptosis with a potential negative impact on innate and adaptive immunity.

DESIGN
Multiparous Holstein-Friesian cows (n=24) were blocked 2 weeks prior to expected calving date according to parity, body condition score, and previous lactation yield (average lactation 6477±354kg) and randomly allocated to mild (MNEB; n=12) or severe (SNEB; n=12) NEB groups. MNEB cows were fed ad lib grass silage and 8 kg day-1 concentrates and milked once daily; SNEB cows were fed 25 kg day-1 silage and 4kg day-1 concentrate and milked three times daily. Measurements of body condition score and EB were used to select cows which showed extremes in EB from each group (MNEB, n=5; SNEB, n=5). Cows were slaughtered on days 6-7 of the first follicular wave after calving (mean number of days post-partum: MNEB mean 13.6 ± 0.75, range 11–15; SNEB mean 14.3 ± 0.56, range 13–16), based on daily transrectal ultrasonography.At slaughter the entire spleen was removed and weighed, and samples weighing  1 g were dissected, rinsed in RNase-free phosphate buffer, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, stored for 4 h in dry ice, and subsequently stored at  80°C.

PLATFORM
GPL18534 [Bovine] Affymetrix Bovine Genome Array [CDF: Affyprobeminer, bovineccdscdf]

CITATIONS
19567785

