TITLE
RNA-Seq using two populations reveals genes and alleles controlling wood traits and growth in Eucalyptus nitens

ORGANISM
Eucalyptus nitens

SUMMARY
Purpose: Kraft pulp yield (KPY) is a key determinant of plantation profitability and increasing the KPY of trees grown in plantations is a major breeding objective. To speed up the breeding process, molecular markers that can predict KPY are desirable. To achieve this goal, we carried out RNA-Seq studies on trees at extremes of KPY in two different trials to identify genes and alleles whose expression correlated with KPY. Methods: We analyzed samples from the extremes of the distribution of KPY in two Eucalyptus nitens trials which also differed in growth to identify genes having differential expression between high and low KPY samples. We used reference-guided transcriptome mapping to study gene expression. Results: Several genes showed differential expression between low and high KPY samples. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment tests revealed up-regulation of stress-related gene categories and down-regulation of gene categories related to wood formation and growth in low KPY samples. More than 110,000 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were detected in both the trials and 2103 of these showed differential allelic expression. Allelic expression of 30% of these variants was correlated with total gene expression. To identify the genes showing patterns of positive selection among the genes expressed in the cambial tissue we compared Ka/Ks ratios. The Ka/Ks ratios compare the rate of nonsynonymous substitutions (Ka) to synonymous substitutions (Ks) which can help identifying genes under selection. By comparing the two trials we observed in total 196 genes which had Ka/Ks ratios of more than 1.5 in both the trials strongly suggesting that these genes are under positive selection. A total of six GO categories were enriched in both trials for genes showing signatures of positive selection . All six categories include genes involved in apoptosis, cell death and defense responses. Conclusions: By conducting RNA-Seq analysis in two trials we identified a number of candidate genes and alleles whose expression is correlated with KPY and growth traits in E. nitens. Most of the down-regulated genes in low KPY samples are cell wall-related genes, suggesting that the identified candidate genes are biologically relevant. A number of potential functional polymorphisms were also identified that showed DAE. We detected positive selection signatures in numerous genes that are consistent with the results from RNA-Seq study in E. camaldulensis. The genes and alleles identified in this study form a valuable resource for association and genomic selection studies.

DESIGN
Xylem mRNA profiles of Eucalyptus nitens from low and high KPY samples were generated by deep sequencing, in two trials, using Illumina HiSeq.

PLATFORM
GPL18542 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Eucalyptus nitens)

CITATIONS
24967893

