TITLE
Cytokine stimulation systems approach demonstrates differences in innate and pro-inflammatory host responses between genetically distinct MERS-CoV isolates.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: The recent emergence of a novel coronavirus in the Middle East (designated MERS-CoV) is a reminder of the zoonotic potential of coronaviruses and the severe disease these etiologic agents can cause in humans. Clinical features of Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) include severe acute pneumonia and renal failure that is highly reminiscent of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) caused by SARS-CoV. The host response is a key component of highly pathogenic respiratory virus infection. Here, we computationally analyzed gene expression changes in a human airway epithelial cell line infected with two genetically distinct MERS-CoV strains obtained from human patients, MERS-CoV-EMC (designated EMC) and MERS-CoV-London (designated LoCoV).   Results: Using topological techniques, such as persistence homology and filtered clustering, we characterized the host response system to the different MERS-CoVs, with LoCoV inducing early kinetic changes, between 3 and 12 hours post infection, compared to EMC. Robust transcriptional changes distinguished the two MERS-CoV strains predominantly at the late time points. Combining statistical analysis of infection and cytokine-stimulated treatment transcriptomics, we identified differential innate and pro-inflammatory responses between the two virus strains, including up-regulation of extracellular remodeling genes following LoCoV infection and differential pro-inflammatory responses between the two strains.   Conclusions: These transcriptional differences may be the result of amino acid differences in viral proteins known to modulate innate immunity against MERS infection.

DESIGN
Triplicate wells of Calu-3 2B4 cells were infected with Human Coronavirus EMC 2012 (HCoV-EMC) or time-matched mock infected.  Cells were harvested at 0, 3, 7, 12, 18 and 24 hours post-infection (hpi), RNA extracted and transcriptomics analyzed by microarray.

PLATFORM
GPL17077 Agilent-039494 SurePrint G3 Human GE v2 8x60K Microarray 039381 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

