TITLE
A global non coding RNA system modulates fission yeast protein levels in response to stress

ORGANISM
Schizosaccharomyces pombe

SUMMARY
Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) signaling cascades transduce information arising from events external to the cell, such as environmental stresses, to a variety of downstream effectors and transcription factors. The fission yeast stress activated MAP kinase (SAPK) pathway is conserved with the p38 and JNK pathways in humans, and comprises the MAPKKKs Win1, Wis4, the MAPKK Wis1, and the MAPK, Sty1. Sty1 and its main downstream effector Atf1 regulate a large set of core environmental stress response genes. The fission yeast genome encodes three other ATF proteins: Atf21, Atf31 and Pcr1. Among these, atf21 is specifically induced under conditions of high osmolarity. We have therefore instigated a programme to investigate the role played by non coding RNAs (ncRNAs) in response to osmotic stress challenge in wild type and atf21Δ cells. By integrating global proteomics and RNA sequencing data, we identified a systematic program in which elevated antisense RNAs arising both from ncRNAs and from 3'-overlapping convergent gene-pairs is directly associated with substantial reductions in protein levels throughout the fission yeast genome. We also found an extensive array of ncRNAs with trans associations that have the potential to influence different biological processes and stress responses in fission yeast, suggesting ncRNAs comprise additional components of the SAPK regulatory system.

DESIGN
Global transcription profiles of fission yeast wild type (WT) and atf21Δ (atf21del) strains over an osmotic stress time course following treatment with 1M sorbitol at 0, 15, 30, 60, 120 and 180 mins. Strand-specific single end sequencing of total RNA was performed in biological triplicates on the Applied Biosystems SOLiD 5500xl Genetic Analyzer System.

PLATFORM
GPL18570 AB 5500xl Genetic Analyzer (Schizosaccharomyces pombe)

CITATIONS
24853205

