TITLE
Macrophages recognize the Helicobacter pylori type IV secretion system in the absence of TLR signaling

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Helicobacter pylori conquered the world by colonizing the human stomach. There are two major groups of strains, one with and one without a cag pathogenicity island (cagPAI), which result in different clinical outcomes with increased severity in cagPAI+ H. pylori infections such as higher inflammation and higher rates of gastric carcinogenesis. Since the gastro-intestinal tract is bombarded with nonspecific ligands that would induce innate signaling, tissue-resident immune cells are believed to lack toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling (anergy).To illuminate how anergic innate immune cells respond to H. pylori, we first investigated the transcriptome of H. pylori infected wild type and MyD88/Trif -/- macrophages, which lack TLR signaling. We observed that the majority of regulated genes in wt macrophages were dependent on TLR signaling. In addition, we found that some of the upregulated genes changed their kinetic behavior depending on TLR signaling. Only anergic macrophages were able to differentiate between cagPAI+ and cagPAI- H. pylori via their transcriptional kinetics of specific early response genes. These genes showed a strong bias towards adenylate-uridylate-rich elements (AREs) containing genes, including the prominent pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1beta and TNF-alpha. Differentiation was dependent on the presence of the cag type 4 secretion system (cagT4SS), but not the CagA effector protein. Thus, we speculate that the direct recognition of the secretion system by tissue-resident macrophages enables the host to differentiate between pathogenic (cagPAI+) and commensal (cagPAI-) H. pylori variants.

DESIGN
Microarray experiments were performed as dual-color hybridizations on Agilent mouse whole genome catalog 44K arrays. To compensate for dye-specific effects, a dye-reversal color-swap was applied. Cells were analyzed at 1h and 3h post infection

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
26243717

