TITLE
To evaluate the effect of Terminalia arjuna as an adjuvant therapy in subjects with stable coronary artery disease on standard dosage regimens versus placebo

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Terminalia arjuna (Roxb.) Wight & Arn., a well known Traditional medicine an. popularly known as Arjuna, has a long antiquity of its role as a cardiac stimulant, and has been stipulated in the treatment of hypercholesterolemia, heart failure and atherosclerosis. The present study was carried out to access the effects of Terminalia arjuna as an adjuvant therapy in angiographically proven patients with stable coronary artery disease who were on conventional medications. The goal of the study was to establish whether Terminalia arjuna exerts beneficial effects in targetting disease signatures which remain unresponsive to the standard therapies currently employed in the clinics. The present study scientifically validates the therapeutic effects of this medicinal plant as an adjuvant therapy along with conventional drugs routinely used in the clinics for prevention and treatment of coronary artery disease.

DESIGN
To access the effect of T.arjuna, a placebo-controlled, double blind randomized study was carried out in 100 angiographically proven non-diabetic patients with coronary artery disease having disease more than 3 months prior to their enrollment and using any combination of cardiac-related medications including ASA, ACEIs, ARBs, β-blockers and statins (Trial Registration Number : REF/2013/03/004810). Out of total 100 patients, 50 patients were on drug A and 50 patients were on drug B for a total duration of 6 months (Follow-up at 3 and 6 months). Both Drug as well as placebo was given in the form of capsule (500mg) provided by The Himalaya Drug Company, Bangalore. Method of concealment was through coded identical containers. All the participants, investigator, outcome Assessor and data-entry operator were blinded during the whole study. Micro-array was performed in 2 randomly selected patients in each sub-group i.e. Terminalia arjuna or Placebo at 3 and 6 months respectively. RNA extraction and hybridization was carried out using Affymetrix microarrays. Differential expression of genes in T.arjuna-treated and Placebo groups was studied to understand the specificity, efficacy and mechanism of action of T.arjuna.

PLATFORM
GPL15207 [PrimeView] Affymetrix Human Gene Expression Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

