TITLE
Gene expression data from type II pneumocytes from adult mice with and without Trf2

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Gas exchange in the mammalian lung occurs in the alveolar sacs lined by epithelial cells that form a barrier allowing effective oxygen diffusion.  Telomere syndromes have their most common manifestation in degenerative disease of the alveoli, both pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema.  We tested the role of telomere dysfunction by inducing deletion of the telomere binding protein Trf2 in type 2 alveolar epithelial cells (AEC2s) that both express the gene encoding surfactant protein C and constitute the regenerative compartment of the alveolar epithelium.  Acquired telomere dysfunction in these cells preferentially induced cellular senescence, and mouse lungs were marked by an inflammatory response even though the telomere dysfunction was restricted to the epithelium.   Senescent AECs had altered gene expression that differentially fell in inflammatory cell signaling pathways.  Bleomycin challenge was uniformly fatal, and Trf2-depleted cells failed to generate clonal alveolar colonies in vitro.  The telomere dysfunction response in AEC2s was in part p53-dependent, and we found evidence of a p53-mediated paracrine survival signal to the mesenchyme.  These data indicate that telomere dysfunction in the alveolar epithelium limits its regenerative capacity and is sufficient to induce inflammation.  It may thus be a primary driving event in telomere-mediated lung disease.  Efforts to restore epithelial regenerative capacity may be an effective approach in a subset of fibrosis and emphysema patients. We studied the gene expression changes in adult type II pneumocytes 7 days after deleting Trf2.  Mice carried floxed allele of Trf2 and mTmG reporter allele. Type II pneumocytes were collected by FACs sorting GFP+ cells from lungs 7 days after administering tamoxifen.

DESIGN
6 total samples were analysed. Three were from control samples that were heterozygous for Trf2 and three samples had Trf2 deleted.

PLATFORM
GPL6096 [MoEx-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Exon 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
25840590

