TITLE
Cpeb4-mediated Translational Regulatory Circuitry Controls Terminal Erythroid Differentiation

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Erythropoiesis is essential to mammals and is regulated at multiple steps by both extracellular and intracellular factors. Many transcriptional regulatory networks in erythroid differentiation have been well characterized. However, our understanding of post-transcriptional regulatory circuitries in this developmental process is still limited. Using genomic approaches, we identified a sequence-specific RNA-binding protein, Cpeb4, which is dramatically induced in terminal erythroid differentiation (TED) by two erythroid important transcription factors, Gata1/Tal1. Cpeb4 belongs to the cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding (CPEB) protein family that regulates translation of target mRNAs in early embryonic development, neuronal synapse, and cancer. Using primary mouse fetal liver erythroblasts, we found that Cpeb4 is required for terminal erythropoiesis by repressing the translation of a set of mRNAs highly expressed in progenitor cells. This translational repression occurs by the interaction with a general translational initiation factor, eIF3. Interestingly, Cpeb4 also binds its own mRNA and represses its translation, thus forming a negative regulatory circuitry to limit Cpeb4 protein level. This mechanism ensures that the translation repressor, Cpeb4, does not interfere with the translation of other mRNAs in differentiating erythroblasts. Our study characterized a translational regulatorycircuitry that controls TED and revealed that Cpeb4 is required for somatic cell differentiation. We used microarray to identify mRNAs associated with Cpeb4 in mouse fetal liver erythroblasts.

DESIGN
Cpeb4 associated mRNAs were isolated from mouse fetal liver erythroblasts using anti-Cpeb4 antibody for immunoprecipitation followed by RNA extraction. Then Affymetrix microarrays were used to identify and quantify the mRNAs associated with Cpeb4.

PLATFORM
GPL17791 [MoGene-2_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 2.0 ST Array [mogene20st_Mm_ENTREZG_17.1.0]

CITATIONS
25220394

