TITLE
Genome Rearrangements and Pervasive Meiotic Drive Cause Hybrid Infertility in Fission Yeast

ORGANISM
Schizosaccharomyces kambucha

SUMMARY
Hybrid sterility is one of the earliest postzygotic isolating mechanisms to evolve between two recently diverged species. Uncovering the mechanisms of hybrid sterilitynot only provides insight into the origins of species but also potentially revealsnovel causes of intra-species infertility.Here we identify causes underlying hybrid infertilityofSchizosaccharomyces pombeand S. kambucha, two fission yeast species that are 99.5% identical at the nucleotide level.These yeasts mate to form viable diploids that efficiently complete meiosis. However,S. kambucha/S. pombe hybrids generate few viable gametes, most of which are either aneuploid or diploid.We find that chromosomal rearrangements and related recombination defectsare major causes of hybrid infertility. Surprisingly, using experiments in which we eliminate meiotic recombination, we find thatrecombination defects cannot completely explain the hybrid infertility. Instead, we find that a significant fraction of hybrid infertility is caused by the action of at least three distinct meiotic drive alleles, one on each S. kambucha chromosome,that “cheat” to be transmitted to more than half (up to 90%) of viable gametes.Two of these driving lociare linked by a chromosomal translocation and thus constitute a novel type of paired meiotic drive complex. We find that all three S. kambuchadrive loci independently contribute to hybrid infertility by causing nonrandom spore death. This study reveals how quickly multiple barriers to fertility can arise.In addition, it provides further support for models in which genetic conflicts, such as those caused by meiotic drive alleles, can drive speciation.

DESIGN
Meiotic DNA double-strand break analysis of Schizosaccharomyces kambucha by immunoprecipitating accumulated Rec12-FLAG covalently linked to DNA (without exogenous crosslinking agent used) following nitrogen starvation .

PLATFORM
GPL16421 Agilent-025249 S. pombe Whole Genome ChIP-on-Chip Microarray 4x44K (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
24963140

