TITLE
Assessment of the Osteoblast Transcriptome in a Model of Markedly Enhanced Intramembranous Bone Formation Due to Constitutive Gs-G Protein Signaling in Osteoblasts

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
G protein coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling in osteoblasts (OBs) is an important regulator of bone formation. We previously described a mouse model expressing Rs1, an engineered constitutively active Gs-coupled GPCR, under the control of the 2.3 kb-Col I promoter. These mice showed a dramatic age-dependent increase in trabecular bone which were accompanied by an increase in OB lineage cells, especially immature OBs, indicated by an expansion of cells expressing Osterix and Runx2 in the whole femur. In this study, we further evaluated how Gs signaling in OBs affects intramembranous bone formation by examining calvariae of one-and nine-week-old Col1(2.3)/Rs1 mice. Rs1 calvariae displayed a dramatic increase in total volume and trabecular bone volume with partial loss of cortical structure. By immunohistochemistry, Osterix was detected in cells throughout the inter-trabecular space in Rs1 expressing mice while Osteocalcin was expressed predominantly in cells along bone surfaces. These findings resembled that previously seen in Rs1 femoral bones, suggesting the role of paracrine mediators secreted from OBs driven by 2.3 kb-Col I promoter could influence early OB commitment, differentiation, and/or proliferation. However, it is still unclear how G protein signaling in mature OBs leads to the observed alterations in bone mass. In this study, we investigated the cellular basis of the skeletal changes by assessing the effect of Rs1 expression in vivo on the transcriptome of mature OBs. We identified the complete set of Gs-GPCRs and other GPCRs that are expressed on OBs which may contribute to the observed skeletal phenotype. Candidate paracrine mediators of the effect of Gs signaling in OBs were determined. Genes affected by Rs1 signaling include those encoding proteins important for cell differentiation, cytokines and growth factors, angiogenesis, coagulation, and energy metabolism. Our results identify novel candidate mediators of the anabolic response to the skeleton to Gs signaling in mature OBs.

DESIGN
We utilized a microarray approach to examine Rs1-induced alterations in the OB transcriptome. The approach used to identify an approximate snapshot of the OB transcriptome at the time of sacrifice by isolating the OB population that expresses Rs1 by GFP labeling, without the use of cell culture. We compared gene expression between control OBs and OBs-expressing Rs1 in triplicates.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
25704759

