TITLE
Multiple classes of insecticides fail to induce the transcription of known detoxification gene families

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Modifications of metabolic pathways are important in insecticide resistance evolution. Mutations leading to changes in expression levels or substrate specificities of cytochrome P450 (P450), glutathione-S-transferase (GST) and esterase genes have been linked to many cases of resistance with the responsible enzyme being shown to utilize the insecticide as a substrate.   Many studies show that the substrates of enzymes are capable of inducing the expression of those enzymes. We investigated if this was the case for insecticides and the enzymes responsible for their metabolism. The induction responses for P450s, GSTs and esterases to six different insecticides were investigated using a custom designed microarray in Drosophila melanogaster. Even though these gene families can all contribute to insecticide resistance, their induction responses by insecticides is minimal. The insecticides spinosad, diazinon, nitenpyram, lufenuron and dicyclanil did not induce any P450, GST or esterase gene expression. DDT was the only insecticide tested capable of eliciting an induction response, but only low levels for one GST and one P450. These results are in contrast to the induction responses observed for the natural plant compound caffeine and the barbituate drug phenobarbital, both of which induced a number of P450 and GST genes to high. Our results show that although insects evolve metabolic resistance to insecticides, induction does not usually have a role in survival after insecticide application, and induction studies cannot be used to predict which genes are capable of metabolizing insecticides. This has implications for managing the evolution of metabolic insecticide resistance in natural insect populations. Keywords: induction response after treatment by various compounds

DESIGN
Drosophila melanogaster larvae were exposed to 7 different compounds and adult males were exposed to 2 different compounds.  For each compound 8 replicates of 50 individuals were exposed to the compound and an additional 8 replicates of 50 individuals were exposed to the appropriate control (that is the same exposure conditions, without the addition of the compound). For each compound, RNA was extracted from all of the 8 samples and then pooled, before labelling.  For each experiment exposed/unexposed labelling dye swaps were used to account for potential differences in labelling efficiency.

PLATFORM
GPL4239 D. melanogaster detoxification array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

