TITLE
Cohesin and cohesion establishment factors distribution on S.Cerevisiae chromosome VI during the cell cycle

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
Two identical sister copies of eukaryotic chromosomes are synthesised during S-phase. To facilitate their recognition as pairs for segregation in mitosis, sister chromatids are held together from their synthesis onwards by the chromosomal cohesin complex. It is thought that replication fork progression is coupled to establishment of sister chromatid cohesion, thus facilitating identification of replication products, but evidence for this has remained circumstantial. Here we show that three proteins required for sister chromatid cohesion, Eco1, Ctf4 and Ctf18 are found close to, and Ctf4 travels along chromosomes with replication forks. The ring-shaped cohesin complex is loaded onto chromosomes before S-phase in an ATP hydrolysis-dependent reaction. Cohesion establishment during DNA replication follows without further cohesin recruitment, and without need for cohesin to re-engage an ATP hydrolysis motif that is critical for its initial DNA binding. This provides evidence for cohesion establishment in the context of replication forks and imposes constraints on the mechanism involved. Keywords: ChIP on chip

DESIGN
Number of hybridizations performed: 33 ChIP analysis Samples used, extract preparation and labelling: • The origin of each biological sample: Saccharomyces cerevisiae (W303 background) • Manipulation of biological samples and protocols used: Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and hybridization to Affimetrix high-density oligonucleotide arrays of S. cerevisiae chromosome VI were performed essentially as previously described (Katou et al., 2003, nature) (Lengronne et al., 2004, nature). • Technical protocols for preparing the hybridization extract The chromatin-immunprecipates were eluted and incubated over night at 65ºC to reverse the cross-link. Immunoprecipitated genomic DNA was incubated with proteinase K, extracted 2 times with phenol/chloroform/isoamylalcohol, precipitated, resuspended in TE and incubated with RnaseA. The DNA was then purified using the Qiagen PCR purification kit, and concentrated by ethanol precipitation. The DNA was amplified by PCR after random priming. 10 ug of amplified DNA was digested with Dnase I to a mean size of 100 bp. After Dnase I inactivation at 95ºC. DNA fragments were end-labeled by addition of 25 U of Terminal Transferase and 1 nmol Biotin-N6ddATP (NEN) for 1 hour at 37ºC as previously described by Winzeler et al. (Science. 281, 1194-1197, 1998). The entire sample was used for hybridization. Hybridization procedures and parameters: •Hybridization, blocking and washing were carried out as previously described (Katou et al., 2003, nature) (Lengronne et al., 2004, nature). Each sample was hybridized to the array in 150 ul containing 6xSSPE; 0.005% TritonX-100; 15 ug fragmented denatured salmon sperm DNA (Gibco-BRL); 1 nmole 3’biotin labelled control oligonucleotide (oligo B2, Affymetrix). Samples were denatured at 100ºC for 10 minutes, and then put on ice before being hybridized for 16 hours at 42ºC in a hybridization oven (GeneChip Hybridization Oven 640, Affymetrix). Washing and scanning protocol provided by Affymetrix was performed automatically on a fluidics station (GeneChip fluidics station 450, Affymetrix). Measurement data and specifications: •Arrays were scanned using the Genechip Scanner3000 7G following the library array description. All processed data files can be downloaded from GEO database. The primary analysis of tiling chip data was performed following exactly the statistical algorithm used for Affymetrix GeneChip Operating Software (GCOS). The detailed information for the algorithm used can be downloaded from the Affymetrix web site. The analysis is available on request. For the ChrVI array, one unit for analysis (locus) was set to 300bp. Fold change value, change p-value, and detection p-value for each locus were obtained by primary analysis. For the discrimination of positive and negative signals for the binding, we used three criteria as follows. First, the reliability of the signal strength was judged by detection p-value of each locus (p-value≤0.025). Secondly, reliability of binding ratio was judged by change p-value (p-value≤0.0025). Thirdly, clusters consisting of at least 900bp contiguous loci that satisfied the above two criteria were selected, because it is known that a single site of protein-DNA interaction resulted in immuno-precipitation of DNA fragments that hybridized not only to the locus of the actual binding site but also to its neighbors. Array Design: •General array design: in situ synthesized arrays by Affymetrix Availability of arrays: commercially available from Affymetrix Location and ID of each spot on arrays: available from Affymetrix on request •Probe type: oligonucleotide The arrays used in this study can be purchased from Affymetrix: Chromosome VI S.cerevisiae: rikDACFC6, P/N# 510636

PLATFORM
GPL347 rikDacFC6

CITATIONS
16962805

