TITLE
The Prion Protein (PrP) is involved in translation via RNA granule-like mRNPs, a connection which is impaired during neurodegenerative diseases

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Cytoplasmic RNA granules have emerged as important elements of posttranscriptional and translational regulation. Stress, germinal and neuronal granules contain RNA-binding proteins capable of self-assembly due to prion-like domains. Hyperassembly mediated by these prion-like domains causes several neurodegenerative diseases. Here, we report a subset of the mammalian prion protein (PrP), also prone to self-assembly, propagation and to cause devastating diseases, is a component of naturally occurring messenger ribonucleoproteins (mRNPs) in adult mouse brains. Biomolecules co-purified with PrP revealed a multitude of diverse RNA granule associated proteins and mRNAs encoding members of the translation machinery, indicating a role in a specialized translation process. Importantly, PrP mutations linked to Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) or fatal familial insomnia (FFI) severely impaired recovery of mRNPs from preclinical mice, possibly representing a very early pathological process. Thus, mutant PrP may cause dysfunction in RNA regulation, thereby joining the constantly expanding ranks of disease associated RNP granule proteins. The file Enrichment_analysis.xlsx contains mRNAs (FDR < 0.01) co-purified with PrP in both WT sample pools as identified by DESeq2 and the respective gene counts and log2 fold changes for CJD and FFI PrP:IP sample pools.

DESIGN
RIP-Seq analysis of mRNAs co-purified with PrP from murine brain cytoplasmic fractions in wild-type (WT), CJD and FFI mice. Each RIP-Seq and control (input) library represents a pool of 12 to 16 co-immunoprecipitation samples out of 3 to 4 mice. To control for post-homogenization artifacts, we conducted an experiment in which we prepared homogenates from WT and PrP-KO (Prnp-/-) mice of different genetic backgrounds (C57BL/6 and 129S4) and identified SNPs in RIP-Seq and control libraries to finally identify specifically co-purified mRNAs.

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

