TITLE
Widespread contribution of transposable elements to the innovation of gene regulatory networks [mouse ENCODE]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Transposable elements (TE) have been shown to contrain functional transcription factor (TF) binding sites for long, but the extent to which TEs contribute TF binding sites is not well know. Here, we comprehensively mapped binding sites for 26 pairs of orthologous TFs, in two pairs of human and mouse cell lines (i.e., leukemia, and lymphoblast), along with epigenomic profiles representing DNA methylation and six histone modifications. We found that on average, 20% of TF binding sites were embedded in TEs. We further identified 710 TF-TE relationships in which certain TE subfamilies enriched for TF binidng sites. TE-derived TF binding peaks were also strongly associated with decreased DNA methylation and increased enhancer-associated histone marks. Most of the TE-derived TF binding sites were species-specific, but we also identified conserved binding sites. Additionally, 66% of TE-derived TF binding events were cell-type specific, associated with cell-type specific epigenetic landscape. For data usage terms and conditions, please refer to http://www.genome.gov/27528022 and http://www.genome.gov/Pages/Research/ENCODE/ENCODEDataReleasePolicyFinal2008.pdf

DESIGN
To evaluate the contribution of transposable elements  (TE) to transcription factor (TF) binding landscapes, we profiled ChIP-seq datasets for 26 TFs in two cell lines in human and mouse, generated by the ENCODE and MouseENCODE consortia. The epigenomic profiles were evaluated from six histone modification in each of the cell lines, also generated by the consortia. We added DNA methylation to the epigenomic profiles, using two complementary techniques, MeDIP-seq and MRE-seq. The human data related to this study are available through GSE56774: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE56774

PLATFORM
GPL15103 Illumina HiSeq 1000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
25319995

