TITLE
An activating NLRC4 inflammasome mutation causes autoinflammation with recurrent macrophage activation syndrome

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Inflammasomes are intracellular innate immune sensors that respond to pathogen and damage-associated signals with the proteolytic cleavage of caspase-1, resulting in IL-1_ and IL-18 secretion and macrophage pyroptosis. The discovery that heterozygous gain-of-function mutations in NLRP3 lead to oversecretion of IL-1_ and cause the autoinflammatory disease spectrum Cryopyrin Associated Periodic Syndrome (CAPS), led to the successful use of IL-1 blocking therapies1. We found that a de novo missense mutation in the regulatory domain of the NLRC4 (IPAF, CARD12) inflammasome causes early-onset recurrent fever flares and Macrophage Activation Syndrome (MAS). Functional analyses demonstrated spontaneous production of the inflammasome-dependent cytokines IL-1² and IL-18 exceeding levels in CAPS patients. The NLRC4 mutation led to constitutive caspase-1 cleavage in transduced cells and enhanced spontaneous production of IL-18 by both patient and NLRC4 mutant macrophages. Thus, we describe a novel monoallelic inflammasome defect that expands the autoinflammatory paradigm to include MAS and suggests novel targets for therapy.

DESIGN
Whole blood RNA-seq from seven timepoints of one patient with NLRC4-MAS as compared to five healthy pediatric controls, 7 NOMID patients with active disease prior to anakinra treatment and the same 7 NOMID patients with inactive disease after anakinra treatment. Please note that seven time points are chronologic time point. They are ordinal, in that " 1 " was drawn before " 2 " , but the distance in time between points is not constant. Thus, time points 4 through 7 correspond to samples drawn while the patient was well AND on treatment. However there may be differences between 4 and 7 pertaining to the length of treatment, and for that reason any of these samples were not considered replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
25217959

