TITLE
Silencing RNA-binding  protein CELF1 inhibits tumor growth and alters gene expression in oral squamous cell carcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are critical regulators of gene expression, but only a small fraction have been studied for their role in malignancy.  Here we report a systematic analysis of RBP CUGBP Elav-Like Family member 1 (CELF1 alias CUGBP1) roles in mRNA alternative splicing, translation and turnover in oral cancer cells. CELF1 is overexpressed in carcinogen-induced oral cancer tumorigenesis mouse model and specific inhibition of CELF1 reduces  tumor growth in vivo. Deep transcriptomic analysis revealed that hundreds of mRNAs were differentially regulated as a function of CELF1 expression in oral cancer cells.  More importantly, the presence of CELF1 promoted alternative splicing of several target mRNAs which are known to be involved in various cancer biological processes. Using a pulse SILAC-based quantitative proteomic approach, we observed hundreds of proteins whose translation was controlled by CELF1 and those altered proteins were implicated in malignancy.  Altogether, these data provided a comprehensive view of the CELF1 mRNA regulatory network in OSCC and suggests that CELF1 is a viable target for therapeutic intervention. Significance  Post-transcriptional mechanisms that regulate cancer cells which are believed to constitute the driving force of many malignancies are poorly understood. We show that oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) emerge as a result of an over expressed RNA-binding protein CELF1, a protein implicated in mRNA turnover, alternative splicing and translation. The resulting mRNA expression repertoire regulates networks of genes whose expression changes regulate oral cancer pathogenesis. Inhibition of CELF1 mitigated OSCC tumor-forming capacity and offers an attractive therapeutic option for oral malignancies.

DESIGN
Transcriptomic analysis of UMSCC-74B oral cancer cells as a function of CELF1 protein expression.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
26498364

