TITLE
The effects of mutants in stress response pathways on gene expression during senescence

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Many signalling pathways are involved in controlling gene expression during plant senescence. Pathways involving SA, JA and ethylene have a role in senescence but none are essential for the senescence process to occur. The aim of this experiment is to classify senescence-enhanced genes into groups depending on the signalling pathways that regulate them. This will provide useful information on the relative importance of each signalling pathway during senescence and allow us to separate potential senescence-specific genes and pathways from the stress response pathways.Mutants in genes in the ethylene pathway (ein2) and the jasmonate pathway (coi1) and the NahG transgenic plant which is defective in the salicylic acid pathway will be grown until the mid flowering stage. Fully developed green and partially senescent leaves will be harvested from the plants at this stage.  In addition, two different lines of Arabidopsis (Col5 glabrous and Col-0) will be grown as controls. Leaves will be harvested from the two control plants before flowering (green) and at mid flowering as above. The control plants will be harvested at two stages to identify the senescence- enhanced genes. The effects of each mutation on the senescence related expression of these genes will then be studied.Mutant RNAs will be isolated in duplicate. The two control accessions will act as replicates for the wild type. Two wild type accessions will be used to reduce possible differences that could be observed the mutants due to slight differences in background. Experimenter name = Vicky Buchanan-Wollaston Experimenter phone = 01789 470382 Experimenter fax = 01789 470552 Experimenter address = Horticulture Research International Experimenter address = Wellesbourne Experimenter address = Warwick Experimenter zip/postal_code = CV35 9EF Experimenter country = UK Keywords: genetic_modification_design; development_or_differentiation_design

DESIGN
10 samples were used in this experiment

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

