TITLE
Changing the transcriptome by altering ZmPIN1a expression

ORGANISM
Zea mays

SUMMARY
A genome-wide transcriptome analysis showed that altering ZmPIN1a expression led to wide-ranging gene expression changes. When comparing overexpression lines A17 with the WT, 2975 genes were differentially expressed with 793 up-regulated and 2182 down-regulated in the leaves, and 2129 genes were differentially expressed with 938 up-regulated and 1191 down-regulated in the roots. GO analysis indicated that these differentially expressed genes participate in multiple biological processes from hormone signaling to metabolism. The local biosynthesis, PAT and signaling of auxin were altered; some was directly employed in plant developments such as AUX/IAA, ARFs and genes related to PAT. The genes involved in ethylene, GA, BR CK and ABA metabolism and signaling were altered as well. These phytohormones were also confirmed as key regulators in plant development and abiotic stress responses. Some of the differentially expressed genes between A17 and WT were identified as Arabidopsis root morphology and development mutant genes. These mutants were abnormal in their plant hormone synthesis and signaling, calcium-mediated signaling, MAP kinase signaling, transcription factors, membrane transporters etc. This finding suggested that ZmPIN1a overexpression led to a change of the auxin signaling transduction and even the metabolism of auxin and the metabolism and signaling of other hormones. These events led to changes in the expression of numerous genes and resulted in the modification of plant morphology, especially the root architecture.

DESIGN
Maize (Zea mays L.) inbred line DH4866, its ZmPIN1a sense transgenic lines A17 and antisense transgenic lines a55 were used in this study. The transcriptome by altering ZmPIN1a expression was done by comparing the transcriptome of WT and transgenic lines both in root and leaf of V3 stage plants.

PLATFORM
GPL9141 Illumina Genome Analyzer (Zea mays)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
