TITLE
Stage-specific regulation of translation revealed by ribosome profiling of Trypanosoma brucei

ORGANISM
Trypanosoma brucei

SUMMARY
Trypanosoma brucei subspecies infect humans and animals in sub-Saharan Africa.  This early diverging eukaryote shows many novel features in basic biological processes, including the use of polycistronic transcription to generate all protein-coding mRNAs.  Therefore we hypothesized that translational control provides a means to tune gene expression during parasite development in mammalian and fly hosts. We used ribosome profiling to examine genome-wide protein production in animal-derived slender bloodstream forms and cultured procyclic (insect midgut) forms.  About one-third of all CDSs showed statistically significant regulation of protein production between the two stages.  Of these, more than two-thirds showed a change in translation efficiency, but few were controlled by this parameter alone.  Ribosomal proteins were translated poorly, especially in animal-derived parasites.  A disproportionate number of metabolic enzymes were up-regulated at the mRNA level in procyclic forms, as were variant surface glycoproteins in bloodstream forms.   Comparison with cultured bloodstream forms from another strain identified stage-specific changes in protein production that transcend strain and growth conditions.  Genes with upstream ORFs had a lower mean translation efficiency but no evidence was seen for involvement of these ORFs in stage-regulation. Ribosome profiling revealed that differences in the production of specific proteins in T. brucei slender bloodstream and procyclic forms are more common than anticipated from analysis of mRNA abundance.  While in vivo and in vitro derived slender bloodstream forms of different strains are more similar to one another than to procyclic forms, they showed numerous differences at both the mRNA and protein production level.

DESIGN
Ribosome profiling and mRNA libraries were constructed in triplicate from in vitro  PCF and in vivo  BF lifestages of theT. brucei Treu927 and in vitro T. brucei  Lister427, to evaluate role of translational gene regulation

PLATFORM
GPL10599 Illumina Genome Analyzer II (Trypanosoma brucei)

CITATIONS
25331479

