TITLE
Dopaminergic subset specification as a model for molecular mechanisms of neural vulnerability in Parkinson's Disease

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Mesodiencephalic dopaminergic (mdDA) neurons critically regulate locomotory behavior and   emotion, and dysfunction is associated with psychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases, including   Parkinson's Disease (PD). A pathological hallmark of PD is the specific degeneration of Substantia  Nigra (SN) neurons, whereas Ventral Tegmental Area (VTA) neurons are relatively unaffected.  Differential molecular programming of the developing SN versus VTA may underly this specific  vulnerability, and indeed molecularly distinct mdDA subsets have been identified during  development. Driven by the hypothesis that the molecular signature of the SN and VTA originates  from differential developmental programming and position along the rostral/caudal axis, we  performed genome-wide expression profiling of FACS-purified rostral versus caudal mdDA  neurons. Here, we present the distinct transcriptomes of these mdDA subsets and demonstrate how,  on a genome-wide scale: 1) transcription factor regulation relates to developmental position, 2)  rostral and caudal mdDA neurons differ in their functional genome, 3) the molecular signature of  rostral versus caudal mdDA neurons relates to the SN versus VTA molecular profile in adult mice  and human and 4) human homologues of rostrally enriched genes are mostly downregulated in the  SN of PD patients. Our analyses substantiate the relationship of developmental positions with the  SN versus VTA distinction in adult, and suggest cross-species conservation of molecular programs.  Driven by these observations, we present 69 target genes that are rostral enriched and  downregulated in PD, and thus provide new leads for the investigation of both the complex coding  of developing mdDA subsets and and the molecular mechanisms underlying subset-specific  vulnerability in PD.

DESIGN
Microarrray analysis was performed in quadruple. Each biological replicate consisted of a pool of   Pitx3(Gfp/+) rostral or caudal samples from 5-7 individual embyros that were interleaved across  litters to account for litter-to-litter variation, or a pool of Gfp-negative cells from the same  specimens as a common reference.

PLATFORM
GPL10787 Agilent-028005 SurePrint G3 Mouse GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

