TITLE
Evolution of microRNA transcriptome at the onset of Drosophila metamorphosis

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster ; Drosophila simulans ; Drosophila yakuba

SUMMARY
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous RNA molecules that contribute to the regulation of gene expression post-transcriptionally.  Recently, patterns of sequence evolution and evolutionary emergence of miRNAs have been analyzed in detail.  However, the extent to which miRNA expression levels vary within and between species, the role of stabilizing selection versus other evolutionary mechanisms in shaping the temporal dynamics of these changes, and how this variation might unveil the interplay between miRNAs and mRNAs remain poorly understood.  This is especially true during key developmental transitions involving miRNA regulation.  Combining deep-sequencing with multi-species microarrays, we assayed miRNA expression levels immediately before (≥18BPF) and after (PF) the increase in steroid hormone ecdysone that triggers metamorphosis.  We did so both at the intra- and interspecific levels in the Drosophila melanogaster species group.  In contrast to their sequence conservation, ~25% of the analyzed miRNAs differed significantly in expression levels at ≥18BPF and/or PF across D. melanogaster strains.  Additionally, ~33% showed modifications in their pattern of expression bias between developmental timepoints.  Relative to the patterns of evolution, changes in miRNA abundance at PF accumulate linearly over evolutionary time while similar changes at ≥18BPF do not.  Importantly, expression levels of ≥18BPF-enriched miRNAs are the most variable within and between species and therefore the least likely to evolve under stabilizing selection, especially as compared to non-developmentally enriched miRNAs.  Overall, functional attributes such as expression ubiquity are more tightly associated with lower levels of miRNA expression polymorphism at PF than at ≥18BPF.  Furthermore, ≥18BPF- and PF-enriched miRNAs showed opposite patterns of covariation in expression with mRNAs, which was found to denote the type of regulatory relationship between miRNA and mRNA.  By focusing on the miRNA expression levels at the onset of metamorphosis, our results have unveiled contrasting functional patterns of evolutionary divergence during ontogeny.

DESIGN
Total 12 samples are included. Please note that the 'description' field in each sample record contains more details for the biological and technical replicate pairs.

PLATFORM
GPL9058 Illumina Genome Analyzer (Drosophila melanogaster) GPL9394 Illumina Genome Analyzer (Drosophila simulans) GPL11000 Illumina Genome Analyzer (Drosophila yakuba)

CITATIONS
24951729

