TITLE
Changes in Gene Expression Profile in two Multidrug Resistant Cell Lines derived from a same Drug Sensitive Cell line

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Resistance to chemotherapy is one of the most relevant aspects of treatment failure in cancer. Cell lines are used as models to study resistance. We analyze the transcriptional profile of two multidrug resistant (MDR) cell lines (Lucena 1 and FEPS) derived from the same drug-sensitive cell K562. Microarray data identified 130 differentially expressed genes (DEG) between K562 vs Lucena, 1,932 between K562 vs FEPS, and 1,211 between Lucena 1 versus FEPS. The NOTCH pathway was affected in FEPS with overexpression of NOTCH2 and HEY1. The highly overexpressed gene in MDR cell was ABCB1, and both presented the ABCB1 promoter unmethylated.

DESIGN
Gene expression profiles were obtained with the GeneChip® Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array (Affymetrix, Singapore) according to the manufacturer´s instructions; all hybridization experiments were carried out in duplicate. The following samples were analyzed: human K562 cell line RNA from cells grown without drugs; human Lucena 1 cell line RNA from cells grown in medium with vincristine (Lucena 1+VCR); Lucena 1 cell line RNA from cells grown in medium without drugs (Lucena 1-VCR); human FEPS cell line RNA from cells grown in medium with daunorubicin (FEPS +DNR), and FEPS cell line RNA from cells grown in medium without drugs (FEPS -DNR).Comparisons of microarray expression data were carried out between K562 vs Lucena 1 grown in medium without vincristine; K562 vs FEPS grown in medium without daunorubicin; Lucena 1 grown in medium without vincristine vs FEPS grown in medium without daunorubicin. Additionally, we compared expression profiles of each multidrug resistant cell line (Lucena 1 and FEPS) grown in different conditions: Lucena 1 grown in medium without vincristine vs Lucena 1 grown in medium with vincristine, and FEPS grown in medium without daunorubicin vs FEPS grown in medium with daunorubicin.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

