TITLE
Stability of gene expression and epigenetic profiles highlights the utility of patient-derived paediatric acute lymphoblastic leukaemia xenografts for investigatoing molecular mechanisms of drug resistance (expression)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Patient-derived tumour xenografts are an attractive model for preclinical testing of  anti-cancer drugs. Insights into tumour biology and biomarkers predictive of responses to  chemotherapeutic drugs can also be gained from investigating xenograft models. As a first step  towards examining the equivalence of epigenetic profiles between xenografts and primary tumours  in paediatric leukaemia, we performed genome-scale DNA methylation and gene expression  profiling on a panel of 10 paediatric B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (BCP-ALL)  tumours that were stratified by prednisolone response.  Results: We found high correlations in DNA methylation and gene expression profiles between  matching primary and xenograft tumour samples with Pearson’s correlation coefficients ranging  between 0.85 and 0.98. In order to demonstrate the potential utility of epigenetic analyses in BCPALL  xenografts, we identified DNA methylation biomarkers that correlated with prednisolone  responsiveness of the original tumour samples. Differential methylation of CAPS2, ARHGAP21, ARX  and HOXB6 were confirmed by locus specific analysis. We identified 20 genes showing an inverse  relationship between DNA methylation and gene expression in association with prednisolone  response. Pathway analysis of these genes implicated apoptosis, cell signalling and cell structure  networks in prednisolone responsiveness.  Conclusions: The findings of this study confirm the stability of epigenetic and gene expression  profiles of paediatric BCP-ALL propagated in mouse xenograft models. Further, our preliminary  investigation of prednisolone sensitivity highlights the utility of mouse xenograft models for  preclinical development of novel drug regimens with parallel investigation of underlying gene  expression and epigenetic responses associated with novel drug responses.

DESIGN
20 samples were analysed using Illumina Infinium WG-6 V3 Expression Chips. This consisted of 10 matched primary tumour and low passage xenografts. Of which, 5 were prednisolone good responders and 5 were prednisolone poor responders. Two Samples were eliminated due to not passing qc.

PLATFORM
GPL6884 Illumina HumanWG-6 v3.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
24885906

