TITLE
Growth of suspension-cultured cells

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
The growth of Arabidopsis cell cultures following their sub-culture into fresh media follows standard growth kinetics of a period of exponential increase associated with high rate of cell division, followed by a slowing of the rate of increase as cells approach stationary phase. For the analysis described here, MM2d cells were subcultured into fresh MSS-medium and samples were taken at day 1, day3, day 5 and day7. We have carried out transcriptional profiling analysis with the aim to follow growth stage specific gene expression during unperturbed growth using the near full genome ATH1 arrays (Menges et al., 2003). Journal Absract: (Plant Molecular Biology: 53, 2003) Plant cell suspension cultures are invaluable models for the study of cellular processes. Here we develop the recently described Arabidopsis suspension culture MM2d as a transcript profiling platform by means of Affymetrix ATH1 microarrays. Analysis of gene expression profiles during normal culture growth, during synchronous cell cycle re-entry and during synchronous cell cycle progression provides a unique integrated view of gene expression responses in a higher-plant system. Particularly striking is that expression of over 14 000 genes belonging to all defined categories can be reliably detected, suggesting that integrated and comparative analysis of data sets derived from transcript profiling of cultures is a powerful approach to identify candidate components involved in a wide range of biological processes. Combinatorial analysis of independent cell cycle synchrony methods allows the identification of genes that are apparently cell-cycle-regulated but are most likely responding to the induction of synchrony. We thus present an integrated genome-wide view of the transcriptional profile of a plant suspension culture and identify a refined set of 1082 cell cycle regulated genes largely independent of synchrony method. Experimenter name = Jim Murray Experimenter phone = 44 1223 334166 Experimenter fax = 44 1223 334162 Experimenter department = J Murray Laboratory Experimenter address = University of Cambridge Experimenter address = Institute of Biotechnology Experimenter address = Tennis Court Road Experimenter address = Cambridge Experimenter zip/postal_code = CB2 1QT Experimenter country = United Kingdom Keywords: time_series_design

DESIGN
4 samples were used in this experiment

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

