TITLE
The early post-germinative embryo and endosperm transcriptomes in Arabidopsis

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Arabidopsis seed germination is coordinated with the strong induction of metabolic pathways required for the mobilisation and utilization of seed storage reserves. These are essential to support the seedling before the establishment of photoauxotrophic growth. The activity of genes encoding enzymes required for lipid mobilisation is regulated largely at the level of transcription, but our knowledge of how this regulation occurs is extremely limited. After germination the rate of lipid reserve mobilisation is determined by the carbohydrate status of the seedling and by the osmotic potential of the growth substrate. The plant response to both of these requires the action of the hormone abscisic acid (ABA). We have shown that this regulation is tissue specific (Penfield et al., 2004 Plant Cell 16, 2705-2718), and that although lipid breakdown in the embryo is inhibited by ABA, lipid breakdown in the endosperm tissues is not. Furthermore, in many species the action of the endosperm is central to the processes controlling seed germination, yet very little is known about gene expression in this tissue, or of the function of the endosperm in mature Arabidopsis seeds. Mature Arabidopsis seeds can be dissected into embryo and endosperm/seed coat fractions, with the latter fraction containing RNA only from the endosperm as the seed coat cells undergo programmed cell death during the latter stages of seed development. In this experiment we divide seeds into embryo and endosperm tissues and transcript profile both shortly after germination, or when germination and lipid reserve mobilisation are inhibited by ABA or by the gibberellin biosynthesis inhibitor paclobutrazol. In this way we can discover the endosperm transcriptome and uncover candidate regulators of lipid mobilisation by searching for genes showing differential expression between embryo and endosperm before and after ABA treatment. Experimenter name = Steven Penfield Experimenter phone = 01904 328759 Experimenter fax = 01904 328762 Experimenter department = Department of Biology Experimenter institute = Centre for Novel Agricultural Products Experimenter address = University of York Experimenter address = PO BOX 373 Experimenter address = York Experimenter zip/postal_code = YO10 5YW Experimenter country = UK Keywords: organism_part_comparison_design

