TITLE
Transcriptomic analysis of human polarized macrophages: more than one role of alternative activation?

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background:  Macrophages are a heterogeneous cell population which in response to the cytokine milieu polarize in either classically activated macrophages (M1) or alternatively activated macrophages (M2). This plasticity makes macrophages essential in regulating inflammation, immune response and tissue remodeling and a novel therapeutic target in inflammatory diseases such as atherosclerosis. The aim of the study was to describe the transcriptomic profiles of differently polarized human macrophages to generate new hypotheses on the biological function of the different macrophage subtypes. Methods and Results: M1 polarization was obtained by IFN-γ and LPS, M2a by IL-4, whereas IL-10 induced a “deactivated” state (M2c). Transcription profile of M1, M2a and M2c macrophages was performed at 6, 12 and 24h after polarization with Whole Human Genome Agilent Microarray technique. Gene Ontology (GO) classification revealed that M1 showed a significant up-regulation whereas M2a a down-regulation of GO terms involved in immunity and inflammation compared to resting macrophage (RM). Unexpectedly, canonical and non-canonical Wnt genes and gene groups, promoting inflammation and tissue remodeling, were up-regulated in M2a compared to RM. Key results were confirmed by real time-PCR. Conclusion: Results from gene expression profile confirmed the specific properties of differentially polarized macrophages. However, the enhanced expression of canonical and non-canonical Wnt pathways in M2a suggests a possible dual role for alternative activation in the modulation of low-grade inflammation.

DESIGN
Four-condition experiment, RM, M1, M2a, M2c. Three point of time course, three replicates for each condition. Dual color experiment, reference sample: human leucocytes

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
25799240

