TITLE
Expression data from mouse brain region bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, nucleus accumbens, and dorsal striatum.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
To identify distinct transcriptional patterns between the major subcortical dopamine targets commonly studied in addiction we studied differences in gene expression between the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST), nucleus accumbens (NAc), and dorsal striatum (dStr) using  microarray analysis. We first tested for differences in expression of genes encoding transcripts for common neurotransmitter systems as well as calcium binding proteins routinely used in neuroanatomical delineation of brain regions. This a priori method revealed differential expression of corticotropin releasing hormone (Crh), the GABA transporter (Slc6a1), and prodynorphin (Pdyn)  mRNAs as well as several others. Using a gene ontology tool, functional scoring analysis, and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis, we further identified several physiological pathways that were distinct  among these brain regions. These two different analyses both identified calcium signaling, G15 coupled protein receptor signaling, and adenylate cyclase-related signaling as significantly different among the BNST, NAc, and dStr. These types of signaling pathways play important roles in, amongst other things, synaptic plasticity. Investigation of differential gene expression revealed several instances that may provide insight into reported differences in synaptic plasticity between these brain regions. The results support other studies suggesting that crucial pathways involved in neurotransmission are distinct among the BNST, NAc, and dStr, and provide insight into the potential use of pharmacological agents that may target region-specific signaling pathways. Further, these studies provide a framework for future mouse-mouse comparisons of transcriptional profiles after behavioral/pharmacological manipulation. Keywords: Tissue type comparison

DESIGN
The genome-wide geen expression of mouse brain region bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, nucleus accumbens, and dorsal striatum were analyzed by Affymetrix Mouse430_2 chip. The expression and functional profiles were compared between these 3 tissues and cross-validated from independant data published before.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
17911379

