TITLE
Bacterial endosymbionts control host sexuality and reveal reproductive genes of early divergent fungi

ORGANISM
Rhizopus microsporus

SUMMARY
Through transcriptome profiling using RNA-seq, we investigated the mechanisms behind bacterial endosymbiont (Burkholderia rhizoxinica) control over host (Rhizopus microsporus) reproductive biology. By analyzing differential expression across six different conditions, including fungal opposite mates growing independently with or without endosymbionts, as well as opposite mates growing together with endosymbionts (mating) or without endosymbionts (no mating), we were able to identify that endosymbionts control expression of a Ras signaling protein critical for sexual reproduction in many fungi (Ras2). As little is known regarding sexual reproduction in Mucoromycotina, we also used these data to investigate conservation of sex-related genes across all fungi, as well as predict potential genes involved in sensing of trisporic acid, the mating pheromone used by these fungi.

DESIGN
6 different conditions were analyzed, each consisting of two biological replicates. These included Rhizopus microsporus ATCC52813 (sex +) growing alone with endosymbionts, R. microsporus ATCC52814 (sex -) growing alone with endosymbionts, ATCC 52813 growing alone without endosymbionts, ATCC52814 growing alone without endosymbionts, ATCC52813 and ATCC52814 growing together with endosymbionts (successfully mating), and ATCC52813 and ATCC52814 growing together without endosymbionts (failure to mate). In each condition, fungi were cultivated on half-strength PDA and plugs of mycelium were placed at the edge of the plate. After 6 days, approximately 2.5 cm of tissue were harvested from the center of the plate. Each biological replicate consists of 5 plates which were pooled prior to RNA extraction to ensure sufficient tissue was collected.

PLATFORM
GPL18689 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Rhizopus microsporus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

