TITLE
Deep Transcriptome Sequencing of a Rice Line Immune to Bacterial Blight Provides Novel Insights into Incompatible Interactions between Rice and Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa ; Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae

SUMMARY
In this study, simultaneous gene expression, of both the host and pathogen, in the incompatible interaction between rice immune line H471 and Xoo race PXO99A with strong virulence, and in compatible ones between H471’s parents and PXO99A, were analyzed in the same infected leaf blades at 1 day and 3 days post-inoculation (dpi) using the RNA-Seq technique.This study provides the first insights into the differantial gene expression profiles of both organisms interacting simultaneously in the incompatible and compatible interactions between Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae and host. Gene groups of differentially expressed genes were identified for PXO99^A and H471. In the Xoo case, a set of  genes associated with two-component systems, involved in Quorum sensing (QS) and protecting the cell from reactive oxygen species (ROS) and oxidative stress, and genes encoding type III secretion systems and Type III (T3) effectors were sequentially up-regulated in the incompatible interaction. In the rice case, differentially regulated genes encoding a set of signal transduction components, sixty-six transcription factors, six genes encoding PPRs and three genes encoding tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR)-like superfamily proteins, and twenty-one resistance proteins have been identified in the incompatible interaction. Among them, six rice genes encoding response regulator receivers and histone proteins in the incompatible interaction uniquely differentially up-regulated in H471 at 1 dpi

DESIGN
Simultaneous gene expression, of both the host (Rice) and pathogen(Xoo), in the incompatible interaction between rice immune line H471 and Xoo race PXO99A with strong virulence, and in compatible ones between H471’s parents and PXO99A, were analyzed in the same infected leaf blades at 1 day and 3 days post-inoculation (dpi) using the RNA-Seq technique.

PLATFORM
GPL18696 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Oryza sativa; Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

