TITLE
Genomic analysis of Fibrolammellar Hepatocellular Carcinoma reveals an unique molecular profile [Training set]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background & Aims: Fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma (FLC) is a rare primary  hepatic cancer usually developed in non-cirrhotic livers of children and young adults  with unknown etiology. Treatment is limited to surgical intervention. To date, molecular  pathogenesis of FLC has been poorly characterized. Herein, we aim to provide an  integrative genomic analysis from a large series of FLC patients.  Methods: A clinically annotated cohort of 77 FLCs was analyzed through whole transcriptome,  SNP-array and whole-exome sequencing. Non-negative matrix  factorization was performed for class discovery, and GSEA, NTP, IPA and  immunohistochemistry for functional annotation. GISTIC algorithm identified  chromosomal aberrations; Mutect and VarScan2, somatic mutations, and Random  survival forest the prognostic signature, validated in an independent cohort.  Results: Unsupervised gene expression clustering revealed 3 robust molecular  classes: Proliferation-51%, enriched with liver cancer proliferation signatures and  mTOR signaling activation, Inflammation-26%, with pro-inflammatory cytokines  signatures, and Unannotated-23%, with non-liver-related cancer signatures.  Neuroendocrine genes and cholangiocyte and hepatocyte histological markers were  present in all classes. FLC showed few copy number variations, being the most  frequent: focal amplification at 8q24.3(12.5%), and deletions at 19p13(28%) and  22q13.32(25%). DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion transcript was observed in 79% of cases.  FLC tumors had 32 damaging mutations on average, affecting uncommon genes in  liver neoplasms (BRCA2, U2AF1). An 8-gene prognostic signature predicted survival in  FLC patients.  Conclusions: FLC genomic analysis reveals a unique molecular portrait characterized  by uncommon damaging mutations and chromosomal aberrations, and a highly  prevalent fusion protein. Three molecular classes, including Proliferation and  Inflammation, define the biological behavior. Prognostic signature will allow better  patient stratification.

DESIGN
Gene-expression profiles of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded human fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma

PLATFORM
GPL14951 Illumina HumanHT-12 WG-DASL V4.0 R2 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
25557953

