TITLE
Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Cardiomyocytes as an In Vitro Model for Coxsackievirus B3-Induced Myocarditis and Antiviral Drug Screening Platform

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
ABSTRACT  Background: Viral myocarditis is a life-threatening illness that may lead to heart failure or cardiac arrhythmias. This study examined whether human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) could be used to model the pathogenic processes of coxsackievirus-induced viral myocarditis and to screen antiviral therapeutics for efficacy.   Methods and Results: Human iPSC-CMs were infected with a luciferase-expressing mutant of the coxsackievirus B3 strain (CVB3-Luc). Brightfield microscopy, immunofluorescence, and calcium imaging were used to characterize virally infected hiPSC-CMs. Viral proliferation on hiPSC-CMs was subsequently quantified using bioluminescence imaging. For drug screening, select antiviral compounds including interferon beta 1 (IFNβ1), ribavirin, pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC), and fluoxetine were tested for their capacity to abrogate CVB3-Luc proliferation in hiPSC-CMs in vitro. The ability of some of these compounds to reduce CVB3-Luc proliferation in hiPSC-CMs was consistent with the reported drug effects in previous studies. Finally, mechanistic analyses via gene expression profiling of hiPSC-CMs infected with CVB3-Luc revealed an activation of viral RNA and protein clearance pathways within these hiPSC-CMs after IFNβ1 treatment.   Conclusions: This study demonstrates that hiPSC-CMs express the coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor, are susceptible to coxsackievirus infection, and can be used to confirm antiviral drug efficacy. Our results suggest that the hiPSC-CM/CVB3-Luc assay is a sensitive platform that could be used to screen novel antiviral therapeutics for their effectiveness in a high-throughput fashion. For this experiment, human induced pluripotent stem cell derived cardiomyocytes were infected with coxsackievirus at multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 5 for 8 hours. Cells were treated with and without interferon beta 1 in order to determine if treatment activates antiviral response genes and/or viral clearance pathways.

DESIGN
4 total samples (2 for each condition) were analyzed

PLATFORM
GPL16686 [HuGene-2_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 2.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
25015077

