TITLE
White-to-brown metabolic conversion of human adipocytes by JAK inhibition

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The rising incidence of obesity and related disorders such as diabetes and heart disease has  focused considerable attention on the discovery of novel therapeutics. One promising  approach has been to increase the number or activity of brown-like adipocytes in white  adipose depots, as this has been shown to prevent diet-induced obesity and reduce the  incidence and severity of type 2 diabetes. Thus, the conversion of fat-storing cells into  metabolically active thermogenic cells has become an appealing therapeutic strategy to  combat obesity. Here, we report a screening platform for the identification of small molecules  capable of promoting a white-to-brown metabolic conversion in human adipocytes. We  identified two inhibitors of Janus Kinase (JAK) activity with no precedent in adipose tissue  biology that permanently confer brown-like metabolic activity to white adipocytes.  Importantly, these metabolically converted adipocytes exhibit elevated UCP1 expression and  increased mitochondrial activity. We further found that repression of interferon signalling and  activation of hedgehog signalling in JAK-inactivated adipocytes contributes to the metabolic  conversion observed in these cells. Our findings highlight a novel role for the JAK/STAT  pathway in the control of adipocyte function and establish a platform to identify compounds  for the treatment of obesity.

DESIGN
Human pluripotent stem-cell derived mesenchymal progenitor cells (PSC-MPCs), white adipose cells (PSC-WA), and brown adipose cells (PSC-BA) were treated with DMSO (as control), a JAK3-inhibitor compound, and a SYK-inhibitor compound respectively. Transcriptomic expression profiling was performed at 24 hours and 7 days respectively. Three biological replicates are available for each condition defined by cell type, compound, and time.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
25487280

