TITLE
In vivo gene expression in granulosa cells during pig terminal follicular development- oligo

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
These vector oligonucleotide hybridizations were performed  to determine the quality of the spotting process. EST with low signal values of the vector array were excluded from the analysis, since they probably were mis-amplified or mis-spotted Keywords: spotting control

DESIGN
cDNA arrays (GPL3978) were first hybridized with a vector oligonucleotide labeled (T7 probe) with {alpha}33P-ATP. After washing, the arrays were exposed 6 hours to radioisotopic-sensitive imaging plates (BAS-2025, Fujifilm, Raytest France S.A.R.L., Courbevoie, France). The imaging plates were scanned thereafter with a phosphor imaging system at a 25 µm resolution (BAS-5000, Fujifilm, Raytest France S.A.R.L., Courbevoie, France). The images were quantified using semi-automated software, BZScan (Lopez F, Rougemont J, Loriod B, Bourgeois A, Loi L, Bertucci F, Hingamp P, Houlgatte R, and Granjeaud S. Feature extraction and signal processing for nylon DNA microarrays. BMC Genomics 5: 38, 2004). Fixed circle segmentation, i.e. a grid process with a fixed spot diameter was applied. The hybridization images were quantified by the extraction of the intensity for each spot. A new version of BZsan (AGscan solfware) is available at : http://mulcyber.toulouse.inra.fr/projects/agscan/ The experimental data were managed using the free BASE software (Saal LH, Troein C, Vallon-Christersson J, Gruvberger S, Borg A, and Peterson C. BioArray Software Environment (BASE): a platform for comprehensive management and analysis of microarray data. Genome Biol 3: SOFTWARE0003, 2002.) modified by Sigenae team to accept radioactive experiments. After stripping, the arrays were hybridized with a complex target. The data correspond to the hybridization of the first membrane DEV-1 and the last one DEV-20. The arrays contained PCR products from 2848 pig cDNA clones (GPL3978), spotted in duplicate on two separate fields of the same membrane (last number 1 of the local ID corresponds to the left field and 2 corresponds to right field). Finally, data consisted in four data files and were used to delete clones with a bad quality of spotting.

PLATFORM
GPL3978 INRA Sus scrofa 4K

CITATIONS
18456903

