TITLE
Expression arrays of inflammatory Ly6C+ monocytes in mice primary or secondary challenged with Listeria monocytogenes

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
In this study we investigated the mechanisms involved in memory T-cell mediated protection using mice vaccinated with the intracellular bacterium Listeria monocytogenes. Our working hypothesis was that rapid activation of cells of the innate immune system, in particular inflammatory Ly6C+ monocytes, were essential in effective protection, in a memory T cell-dependent manner. Thus we generated a comprehensive comparison of the genetic program of activated Ly6C+ monocytes during a primary or a secondary infection with Listeria monocytogenes, at 8 hours post challenge infection. Abstract of corresponding publication: Cells of the innate immune system are essential for host defenses against primary microbial pathogen infections, yet their involvement in effective memory responses of vaccinated individuals has been poorly investigated. Here we show that memory T cells instruct innate cells to become potent effector cells in a systemic and a mucosal model of infection. Memory T cells controlled phagocyte, dendritic cell and NK or NK T cell mobilization and induction of a strong program of differentiation, which included their expression of effector cytokines and microbicidal pathways, all of which were delayed in non-vaccinated hosts. Disruption of IFN-gamma-signaling in Ly6C+ monocytes, dendritic cells and macrophages impaired these processes and the control of pathogen growth. These results reveal how memory T cells, through rapid secretion of IFN-gamma, orchestrate extensive modifications of host innate immune responses that are essential for effective protection of vaccinated hosts.

DESIGN
Overall design: Inflammatory monocytes were purified (see below for isolation method) from 4 groups of 3 individual mice each (triplicate): (i) uninfected mice, (ii) primary infected, (iii) secondary infected, (iv) secondary infected and T-cell depleted 1 day before. Isolation of cells was done on 3 different days for true biological replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
24931122

