TITLE
Genome-wide analysis in Human Colorectal Cells reveals Ischaemia-mediated expression of motility genes via DNA hypomethylation (promoter array)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
DNA hypomethylation is an important epigenetic modification found to occur in many  different cancer types, leading to the upregulation of previously silenced genes and  loss of genomic stability. We previously demonstrated that hypoxia and  hypoglycaemia (ischemia), two common micro-environmental changes in solid tumors,  decrease DNA methylation through the downregulation of DNMTs in human colorectal  cancer cells. Here, we utilized a genome-wide cross-platform approach to identify  genes hypomethylated and upregulated by ischemia. Following exposure to hypoxia or  hypoglycaemia, methylated DNA from human colorectal cancer cells (HCT116) was  immunoprecipitated and analysed with an Affymetrix promoter array. Additionally, RNA  was isolated and analysed in parallel with an Affymetrix expression array. Ingenuity  pathway analysis software revealed that a significant proportion of the genes  hypomethylated and upregulated were involved in cellular movement, including PLAUR  and CYR61. A Matrigel invasion assay revealed that indeed HCT116 cells grown in  hypoxic or hypoglycaemic conditions have increased mobility capabilities. Confirmation  of upregulated expression of cellular movement genes was performed with qPCR. The  correlation between ischemia and metastasis is well established in cancer progression,  but the molecular mechanisms responsible for this common observation have not been  clearly identified. Our novel results suggest that hypoxia and hypoglycaemia may be  driving changes in DNA methylation through downregulation of DNMTs. This is the first  report to our knowledge that provides an explanation for the increased metastatic  potential seen in ischemic cells; i.e. that ischemia could be driving DNA  hypomethylation and increasing expression of cellular movement genes.

DESIGN
Genomic DNA from the Human Colorectal cancer Cell line HCT116 cultured normally or in hypoxic or Hypoglycaemic conditions was enriched using Methylated DNA Immunoprecipitation, Amplified using whole genome amplification, and hybridized in triplicate (for each treatment) to Affymetrix Human promoter 1.0R arrays arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL5082 [Hs_PromPR] Affymetrix Human Promoter 1.0R Array

CITATIONS
25079072

