TITLE
Effect of human TGF-β on the gene expression profile of Echinococcus granulosus protoscoleces

ORGANISM
Echinococcus granulosus

SUMMARY
TGF-β is a crucial cytokine participate in the interplay between the intermediate host and helminthes. TGF-β receptors were discovered in many cestode, and could bind the human TGF-β. However, the function of host TGF-β on the Echinococcus is still not elucidated, and this paper aim to explore the question at transcription level. Microarray analysis was used to investigate differential expression genes in protoscolices of Echinococcus granulosus cultured in the presence or absence of human TGF-β at different time points (4h, 8h and 24h) in vitro. A total of 523 genes were up- or down-regulated in response to TGF-β, compared with control group, 390 genes were up-regulated and 47 genes were down-regulated at 8h, and 376 genes were up-regulated and 19 genes were down-regulated at 12h, including 310 differential genes were regulated at both time point. Only 1 gene down-regulated at 4 h. Gene ontology (GO) analysis showed that the biological process of the up-regulated genes in protoscolex were predominantly involved in DNA packaging, nucleosome assembly, chromatin assembly, etc. And the cellular component gene were located in cell nucleus. TGF-β appeared to promote growth or development of the protoscolex by up-regulated the gene related with mitosis. In addition, the study also indicated that TGF-β has a multiple influence on the protoscolex, as reflected in the increased stimulation of gene expression of the ErbB signaling pathway, MAPK signaling pathway, Notch signaling pathway and VEGF signaling pathway.

DESIGN
Isolated E. granulosus protoscoleces were treated with human TGF-β at different time points (4h, 8h and 24h) in vitro, and replicated 3 times. Each samples independently grown and harvested. And was extracted of total RNA using the TRIZOL Reagent according to the manufacturer's instructions. Gene-expression profiling was performed for each RNA sample separately on the GeneChip of Echinococcus granulosus Genome Array (Capitalbio) at CapitalBio Corporation (Beijing, China). The reference samples are protoscoleces treated by human TGF-β(0 h)

PLATFORM
GPL18747 9K Echinococcus granulosus Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

