TITLE
Expression analysis in hipsc-derived neurons exposed to botulinum neurotoxin A subtype 1 and a type A atoxic derivative

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Transcriptome analysis of RNA extracted from human induced pluripotent stem cell (hipsc)-derived neurons exposed to botulinum neurotoxin type A1 (BoNT/A1) and an atoxic derivative, BoNT/A ad. Botulinum neurotoxin type A1 (BoNT/A1) is a potent protein toxin responsible for the potentially fatal human illness botulism.  Despite this, the long-lasting flaccid muscle paralysis caused by BoNT/A has led to its rise as a powerful and versatile bio-pharmaceutical.  The flaccid paralysis is due to specific cleavage of SNAREs by BoNTs inside neurons.  However, potential effects of BoNTs on intoxicated neurons besides the cleavage of SNAREs have not been studied in detail. In this study we investigated by microarray analysis the effects of BoNT/A and a catalytically inactive derivative (BoNT/A ad) on the transcriptome of human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived neurons at 2 days and 2 weeks after exposure.  While there were only minor changes in expression levels at 2 days post exposure, at 2 weeks post exposure 492 genes were differentially expressed more than 2-fold in BoNT/A1-exposed cells when compared to non-exposed populations, and 682 genes were differentially expressed in BoNT/A ad-exposed cells.  The vast majority of genes were similarly regulated in BoNT/A1 and BoNT/A ad-exposed neurons, and the few genes differentially regulated between BoNT/A1 and BoNT/A ad-exposed neurons were regulated less than 3.5 fold.  These data indicate a similar response of neurons to BoNT/A1 and BoNT/A ad exposure.  The most highly regulated genes in cells exposed to either BoNT/A1 or BoNT/A ad are involved in neurite outgrowth and calcium channel sensitization.

DESIGN
18 samples were used for this project: 6 populations were exposed to BoNT/A1, 6 to BoNT/A ad, and 6 were non-exposed.  All exposures lasted for 48h, at which point 3 samples of each exposure group were harvested (2d condition), and the remaining 3 samples were grown for an additional 12d (2wk condition). Analysis was performed using the Affymetrix HG U133 Plus 2.0 array, and data was extracted using the Affymetrix Expression Console v 1.2.0.20 software

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
25337697

