TITLE
Expression data from Sheep kidney fat (KF) in lambs at 12 weeks of age; comparison of two genotypes, Callipyge (NCpat (CN)) and wild type (NN)

ORGANISM
Ovis aries

SUMMARY
The ovine Callipyge mutation causes postnatal muscle hypertrophy localized to the pelvic limbs and torso, as well as body leanness. The mechanism underpinning enhanced muscle mass is unclear, as is the systemic impact of the mutation. Using muscle fibre typing immunohistochemistry we confirmed muscle specific effects and demonstrated that affected muscles had greater prevalence and hypertrophy of type 2X fast twitch glycolytic fibres and decreased representation of types 1, 2C, 2A and/or 2AX fibres. To investigate potential systemic effects of the mutation, proton NMR spectra of plasma taken from lambs at 8 and 12 weeks of age were measured. Multivariate statistical analysis of plasma metabolite profiles demonstrated effects of development and genotype but not gender. Plasma from Callipyge lambs at 12 weeks of age, but not 8 weeks, was characterized by a metabolic profile consistent with contributions from the affected hypertrophic fast twitch glycolytic muscle fibres. Microarray analysis of the perirenal adipose tissue depot did not reveal a transcriptional effect of the mutation in this tissue. We conclude that there is an indirect systemic effect of the Callipyge mutation in skeletal muscle in the form of changes of blood metabolites, which may contribute to secondary phenotypes such as body leanness. Microarrays were used for transcription profiling of kidney fat samples taken from Callipyge (n=4) and wild type (n=4) lambs at 12 weeks of age.

DESIGN
Sheep used in this experiment were bred from a research flock of Dorset/Suffolk/Rambouillet cross-bred sheep raised at Utah State University and cared for and euthanased for sample collection in accordance with the animal ethics guidelines of Utah State University (Utah, USA).  Kidney fat (KF) samples were taken from lambs at 12 weeks of age; four callipyge (CN) genotype animals and four normal (NN) genotype animals were compared.

PLATFORM
GPL2112 [Bovine] Affymetrix Bovine Genome Array

CITATIONS
24937646

