TITLE
Streptococcus pneumoniae R6 genomic DNA

ORGANISM
Streptococcus pneumoniae R6

SUMMARY
The most basic level of transcription regulation in Streptococcus pneumoniae is the organization of its chromosome in topological domains. In response to drugs that caused DNA-relaxation, a global transcriptional response was observed. Separate domains were identified depending of the transcription of their genes: up-regulated (U), down-regulated (D), non-regulated (N), and flanking (F). We show here that these distinct domains have different expression and conservation tendencies. Microarray fluorescence units under non-relaxation conditions, taken as a measure of gene transcription level, were significantly lower in F genes than in the other domains in the same range of AT content. Transcription level categorization of the domains was D > U > F. In addition, a comparison of 12 S. pneumoniae genome sequences evidenced conservation of gene composition in the U and D domains and extensive gene interchange in F domains. We tested domain organization by measuring the relaxation-mediated transcription of eight insertions of a heterologous Ptccat cassette, two in each type of domain, showing that transcription depended on their chromosomal location. Moreover, transcription from the four promoters directing the five genes involved in supercoiling homeostasis, located either in U (gyrB), D (topA), or N (gyrA and parEC) domains was analyzed both in their chromosomal locations and in a replicating plasmid. Although expression from the chromosomal PgyrB and PtopA showed the expected domain regulation, their expression was down-regulated in the plasmid, which behaved as a D domain. However, both PparE and PgyrA carried their own regulatory signals, their topology-dependent expression being equivalent in the plasmid or in the chromosome. In PgyrA a DNA bend acted as a DNA supercoiling sensor. These results revealed that DNA topology works as a general transcriptional regulator, superimposed to other kind of more specific regulatory mechanisms.

DESIGN
Genomic DNA was extracted from S. pneumoniae R6 cultures during exponential growth, amplified and used for microarray hybridization. Two independent replicates were performed.

PLATFORM
GPL18733 Agilent-061990 Genotypic S.pneumoniae R6 8x60K GE MicroArray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
25019515

