TITLE
Transcriptional changes in Manila clam (Ruditapes philippinarum) in response to brown ring disease

ORGANISM
Ruditapes philippinarum

SUMMARY
Transcriptional profiling of different clam tissues (hemolymph, extrapallial fluid and mantle) in response to brown ring disease; Brown ring disease (BRD) is a bacterial infection affecting the economically-important clam Ruditapes philippinarum. The disease is caused by a bacterium, Vibrio tapetis, that colonizes the edge of the mantle, altering the biomineralization process and normal shell growth. Altered organic shell matrices accumulate on the inner face of the shell leading to the formation of the typical brown ring in the extrapallial space (between the mantle and the shell). Even though structural and functional changes have been described in solid (mantle) and fluid (hemolymph and extrapallial fluids) tissues from infected clams, the underlying molecular alterations and responses remain largely unknown. This study was designed to gather information on clam molecular responses to the disease and to compare focal responses at the site of the infection (mantle and extrapallial fluid) with systemic (hemolymph) responses. To do so, we designed and produced a Manila clam expression oligoarray (15K Agilent) using transcriptomic data available in public databases and used this platform to comparatively assess transcriptomic changes in mantle, hemolymph and extrapallial fluid of infected clams. Results showed significant regulation in diseased clams of molecules involved in pathogen recognition (e.g. lectins, C1q domain-containing proteins) and killing (defensin), apoptosis regulation (death-associated protein, bcl-2) and in biomineralization (shell matrix proteins, perlucin, galaxin, chitin- and calcium-binding proteins). While most changes in response to the disease were tissue-specific, systemic alterations included co-regulation in all 3 tested tissues of molecules involved in microbe recognition and killing (complement-related factors, defensin). These results provide a first glance at molecular alterations and responses caused by BRD and identify targets for future functional investigations.

DESIGN
Two-condition experiment (healthy/diseased), 3 tissues, 6 biological replicates/tissue/condition Please note that mantle tissues from this study were labelled with Cy3 and hybridized against a set of reference samples that are not part of this study. Thus, the Cy5 data from the associated raw data files were excluded in the analysis. Please note that hemocytes are collected from hemolymph or extrapallial fluid and hybridized on the same array (i.e. technically as dual channel) but the results were processed as though they are single channel (Cy3 and Cy5 signals are calculated). The hemocytes from extrapallial fluid were labelled with Cy3, while hemocytes from hemolymph were labelled with Cy5.  The raw data files that are associated with two sample records are linked as series supplementary files and are indicated in the sample description field.

PLATFORM
GPL18750 Agilent-034518 Ruditapes philippinarum 15K v2

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

