TITLE
Transcriptional Profiling of the Immune Response to Marburg Infection

ORGANISM
Macaca fascicularis ; Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Marburg virus is a genetically simple RNA virus that causes a severe hemorrhagic fever upon infection in humans and non-human primates. The mechanism of how this pathogenesis comes about is not well understood, but it is well accepted that pathogenesis is significantly driven by a hyperactive immune response. To better understand the overall response to Marburg virus challenge, we undertook a transcriptomic analysis of immune cells circulating in the blood following aerosol exposure of cynomolgus macaques to a lethal dose of Marburg virus. Using two-color microarrays, we analyzed the transcriptome of peripheral blood mononuclear cells that were collected throughout the course of infection from 1 to 9 days postexposure, representing the full course of the infection. The host response to aerosolized Marburg was evident at 1 day post-exposure. The response followed a 3-phase response that was led by a robust innate immune response. Analysis of cytokine transcripts that were overexpressed during infection indicated that previously unanalyzed cytokines are likely induced in response to exposure to Marburg virus, and further suggested that the immune response may favor a Th2 response that would hamper the development of an effective antiviral immune response.  Late infection events included the upregulation of coagulation associated factors. These findings suggest new avenues for investigating the pathogenesis of Marburg virus infection and provide rich dataset of factors expressed throughout the course of infection that can be investigated as markers of infection and targets for therapy.

DESIGN
RNA was isolated from a total of 30 PBMC samples from 15 cynomologus macaques infected with Marburg Virus. Samples were obtained at sequential timepoints post-infection, and included a pre-infection specimen from each animal. These samples were then processed and hybridized onto the Agilent 2-color arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL10332 Agilent-026652 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K v2 (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
26202234

