TITLE
Transcriptome data for bacterial and fungal keratitis compared to cadaver cornea

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Microbial keratitis is a major cause of blindness worldwide. An excessive host inflammatory response can occur even after adequate antimicrobial treatment. This results in tissue damage with corneal thinning and even perforation, which may require corneal transplantation. In this study we investigated the pathways involved in the pathophysiology of this disease by comparing the human transcriptome profile of tissue from culture-proven bacterial and fungal keratitis (n=7 and n=8 respectively) with normal non-infected cadaveric corneal tissue (C, n=12) using Illumina HT12 v4 microarrays. The causative organisms were Streptococcus pneumoniae (n=6) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (n=1) for bacterial keratitis (BK). Fungal keratitis (FK) was caused by Fusarium sp. (n=5), Aspergillus sp. (n=2, A. flavus and terreus) and Lasiodiplodia sp. (n=1). Differential expression (DE) analysis revealed 2310 significantly altered probes in the BK v C comparison, and 1813 probes for FK v C.  The most highly upregulated gene in both comparisons was MMP9 with fold changes (FC) of 64 (fdr-adjusted p < 6 x10-11) for FK v C and 89 for BK v C (fdr-adjusted p < 4 x10-11) respectively. Network co-expression analyses revealed the defense response, inflammatory response and extracellular matrix mechanisms to be the main functional pathways involved. Microarray results were validated by performing real-time quantitative PCR (RTqPCR) for 46 DE genes using RNA extracted from the same samples. There was a high correlation between log2 FC values from microarray and RTqPCR. Further studies are needed to evaluate the most highly differentially expressed genes as possible biomarkers of disease progression or therapeutic targets.

DESIGN
Case - control study design. Corneal ulcer tissue from 8 bacterial and 9 fungal ulcers was excised at the time of corneal transplantation surgery and immediately preserved in RNALater. Non-infected corneal tissue from 13 cadaver corneas were the control tissue. Transcriptome profile generated using Illumina HT12 v4 beadchips. Differential expression analysis was performed with pairwise comparisons: bacterial ulcers versus controls, fungal ulcers versus controls and bacterial versus fungal ulcers. Microarray results validated with RTqPCR.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

