TITLE
Strand-specific transcriptomes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces paradoxus

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae ; Saccharomyces paradoxus

SUMMARY
Background: Recent studies have demonstrated that antisense transcription is pervasive in budding yeasts and is conserved between Saccharomyces cerevisiae and S. paradoxus. While studies have examined antisense transcripts of S. cerevisiae for inverse transcription in stationary phase and stress conditions, there is a lack of comprehensive analysis of the conditional specific evolutionary characteristics of antisense transcription between yeasts. Here we attempt to decipher the evolutionary relationship of antisense transcription of S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus cultured in mid log, early stationary phase, and heat shock conditions. Results: Massively parallel sequencing of sequence strand-specific cDNA library was performed from RNA isolated from S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus cells at mid log, stationary phase and heat shock conditions. We performed this analysis using a stringent set of sense ORF transcripts and non-coding antisense transcripts that were expressed in all the three conditions, as well as in both species. We found the divergence of the condition specific anti-sense transcription levels is higher than that in condition specific sense transcription levels, suggesting that antisense transcription played a potential role in adapting to different conditions. Furthermore, 43% of sense-antisense pairs demonstrated inverse transcription in either stationary phase or heat shock conditions relative to the mid log conditions. In addition, a large part of sense-antisense pairs (67%), which demonstrated inverse transcription, were highly conserved between the two species. Our results were also concordant with known functional analyses from previous studies and with the evidence from mechanistic experiments of role of individual genes. Conclusions: This study provides a comprehensive picture of the role of antisense transcription mediating sense transcription in different conditions across yeast species. We can conclude from our findings that antisense regulation could act like an on-off switch on sense regulation in different conditions.

DESIGN
Transcriptomes of two yeast species under mid-log phase, early stationary phase, and after heat shock treatment were generated by Illumina HiSeq 2000 paired-end sequencing

PLATFORM
GPL13821 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) GPL17602 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Saccharomyces paradoxus)

CITATIONS
24965678

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
