TITLE
Genome-wide transcriptome analysis revealed extensive alternative RNA splicing in gene expression in the zoonotic parasite Schistosoma japonicum

ORGANISM
Schistosoma japonicum

SUMMARY
Background: Schistosoma japonicum is a pathogen of the phylum Platyhelminths  that causes zoonotic schistosomiasis endemic in China and Southeast Asian countries. Control of the disease has been hampered by the lack of efficient measures. The development of tools for diagnosis of acute and chronic infection, and novel antiparasite reagents all relies on the understanding of the biological mechanism of the parasite.   Results: In this study, the polyadenylated transcripts from the male and female S. japonicum were sequenced by a high-through-put RNA-seq technique. Bioinformatic and experimental analyses were focused on the posttranscriptional RNA processing, which at the first time revealed the extensive alternative splicing events occurred in the adult stage of the parasite. The number of protein-coding sequences identified in the transcriptomes of the female and male S. japonicum was 15,939 and 19,501 respectively, which is more than that predicted from the annotated genome sequence. Further, we identified four types of posttranscriptional processing, also called alternative splicing, in both female and male worms of S. japonicum, including exon skipping, intron retention, alternative donor site, and alternative acceptor site. Unlike mammalian organisms, alternative donor site and alternative acceptor site were found to be more common than the other two types of posttranscriptional processing in S. japonicum. In total, 13,438 and 16,507 alternative splicing events were respectively predicted in the transcriptomes of female and male S. japonicum.   Conclusions: By using RNA-seq technology, we obtained the global transcriptomes of male and female S. japonicum. These results further provide a comprehensive view of the global transcriptome of S. japonicum. The findings of a substantial level of alternative splicing events dynamically occurring in the parasitation of the S. japonicum in the mammalian hosts suggested a complicate transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation mechanisms employed by the parasite. The data will not only significantly improve the re-annotation of the genome sequences, but will also provide new information in the biology of the parasite.

DESIGN
Two samples are analyzed.

PLATFORM
GPL18816 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Schistosoma japonicum)

CITATIONS
25156522

