TITLE
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor contributes to the cardiogenic potential of adult resident progenitor cells in failing murine heart

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Aims: Resident cardiac progenitor cells show homing properties when injected into the injured but not into the healthy myocardium. The molecular background behind this difference in behavior needs to be studied to elucidate how adult progenitor cells can restore cardiac function of the damaged myocardium. Since the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) moderates cardioprotection in injured hearts, we focused on delineating its regulatory role in the damaged myocardium. Methods and Results: Comparative gene expression profiling of freshly isolated undifferentiated Sca-1 progenitor cells derived either from heart failure transgenic αMHC-CyclinT1/Gαq overexpressing mice or wildtype littermates revealed transcriptional variations. Bdnf expression was up-regulated 5-fold during heart failure, which was verified by qRT-PCR and confirmed at the protein level. The migratory capacity of Sca-1 cells from transgenic heart was improved by 15% in the presence of 25ng/ml BDNF. Furthermore, BDNF-mediated effects on Sca-1 cells were studied via pulsed Stable Isotope Labeling of Amino acids in Cell Culture (pSILAC) proteomics approach. After BDNF treatment, significant differences between newly synthesized proteins in Sca-1 cells isolated from control and transgenic mice were observed for CDK1, SRRT, HDGF, and MAP2K3, which are known to regulate cell cycle, survival and differentiation. Moreover, BDNF repressed the proliferation of Sca-1 cells from transgenic hearts. Conclusion: Comparative profiling of resident Sca-1 cells revealed elevated BDNF levels in the failing heart. Exogenous BDNF (i) stimulated migration, which might improve the homing ability of Sca-1 cells derived from the failing heart and (ii) repressed the cell cycle progression suggesting its potency to ameliorate heart failure.

DESIGN
Freshly isolated Sca-1 cells were derived from age-matched Cyclin T1/Gq overexpressing mice (Cyc) and their healthy counterparts (Wt) were used for comparative transcriptional profiling considering Wt as baseline condition.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
25799225

