TITLE
Epigenome Wide Association Study unveils differential methylation of Leukocyte cell adhesion molecules in neonatal sepsis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
DNA methylation is the current strategy in the field of biomarker discovery due to its prognostic efficiency. Its role in prognosis and early diagnosis has been recognized in various types of cancer. Sepsis still remains one of the major causes of neonatal mortality due to the lack of sensitive diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers. Delay in sepsis diagnosis leads to treatment difficulties and poor outcomes. In this study, we have done an epigenome wide search to identify potential markers for prognosis of neonatal sepsis which may improve the treatment strategies. Illumina 450K methylation microarray revealed that the genes involved in transendothelial leukocyte migration were differentially methylated in septic newborns compared to non-septic newborns, especially the Protocadherin Beta group. Genes like ITGB2-AS1, CCS were found to be differentially methylated significantly, which gives the hope of developing novel, potential epigenetic markers for neonatal sepsis. From this study, we conclude that DNA methylation might play crucial functions in the pathophysiology of neonatal sepsis which was obvious from the difference in methylation level among septic and non-septic babies. In future, the potentiality of these epigenetic biomarkers can be studied in large scale with appropriate techniques which will give further in depth knowledge in this context.

DESIGN
DNA methylation analysis of three septic newborns and three non-septic newborns were performed with  Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. Peripheral venous blood sample was collected from the babies during the third day of birth while taking blood for routine investigations. Non-septic babies are babies admitted to NICU and sampled for other minor ailments. Genomic DNA was extracted using QIAmp DNA Blood Mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and bisulfite treated using EZ DNA methylation kit (Zymoresearch, USA).

PLATFORM
GPL13534 Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (HumanMethylation450_15017482)

CITATIONS
26484145

