TITLE
Effects of soy supplementation on gene expression in breast cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background   There are conflicting reports on the impact of soy on breast carcinogenesis. This study examines the effects of soy supplementation on breast cancer-related genes and pathways.  Methods   Women (n = 140) with early-stage breast cancer were randomized to soy protein supplementation (n = 70) or  placebo (n = 70) for 7 to 30 days, from diagnosis until surgery. Adherence was determined by plasma isoflavones:  genistein and daidzein. Gene expression changes were evaluated by NanoString inin pre- and post-treatment  tumor tissue. Genome-wide expression analysis was performed on post-treatment tissue. Proliferation (Ki67) and  apoptosis (Cas3) were assessed by immunohistochemistry.  Results   Plasma isoflavones rose in the soy group (two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test, P < .001) and did not change in  the placebo group. In paired analysis of pre- and post-treatment samples, 21 genes (out of 202) showed altered  expression (two-sided Student’s t-test, P < .05). Several genes including FANCC and UGT2A1 revealed different  magnitude and direction of expression changes between the two groups (two-sided Student’s t-test, P < .05).  A high-genistein signature consisting of 126 differentially expressed genes was identified from microarray analysis  of tumors. This signature was characterized by overexpression ( > 2 fold) of cell cycle transcripts, including  those which promote cell proliferation, such as FGFR2, E2F5, BUB1, CCNB2, MYBL2, CDK1, and CDC20 (P < .01).  Soy intake did not result in statistically significant changes in Ki67 or Cas3.  Conclusions   Gene expression associated with soy intake and high plasma genistein define a signature characterized by overexpression  of FGFR2 and genes that drive cell cycle and proliferation pathways. These findings raise the concerns  that in a subset of women soy could adversely affect gene expression in breast cancer.

DESIGN
Genome-wide expression analysis was performed on breast cancer tissue from women following treatment with soy (n=28) or placebo (n=23).

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
25190728

