TITLE
A Ferritin Mutant Induces Protective Immunity against Virulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis Infection

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Iron plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of many organisms including Mtb. It is the preferred redox cofactor in many basic cellular processes but due to its insolubility and potential toxicity under physiological conditions is a limiting nutrient in the host environment.  Previously, we demonstrated that Mtb requires the iron storage protein ferritin (BfrB), for adaptation to both low and sufficient concentrations of environmental iron. We also showed that absence of bfrB compromises the ability of Mtb to overcome iron deficiency and prevent excess iron toxicity.  In this study, we tested whether vaccination with ∆bfrB could elicit host protective immune response against virulent Mtb infection.  The results show that immunization of mice with the ∆bfrB stimulates protective immunity associated with reduced immunopathology and better containment of the infection compared to vaccination with BCG.  Genome-wide transcriptome analysis showed a distinct expression pattern of significantly differentially expressed genes (SDEG) between the ∆bfrB and BCG-vaccinated, Mtb-infected mice lungs.  Our network/pathway analysis of SDEG revealed significant inhibition of inflammatory response genes and activation of fibrosis genes in the ∆bfrB, compared to BCG vaccinated, Mtb-infected mice lungs. The results provide a frame work for the study of mechanisms of protection relevant for the design of new and improved preventive strategies for TB.

DESIGN
Female C57BL/6 mice were vaccinated subcutaneously with ∆bfrB or BCG .  At 8 weeks post-vaccination, mice were aerosol infected with Mtb H37Rv. At 4 weeks post infection, mice  were sacrificed and lungs were removed. Lung total RNA from vaccinated and Mtb-infected mice was extracted, purified  and were processed separately for microarray analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

