TITLE
Cognitive dysfunction and amyloid beta accumulation are ameliorated by the ingestion of green soybean extract in aged mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The prevention or delay of brain senescence would enhance the quality of life for older persons. We investigated the effects of soybean extracts in senescence-accelerated (SAMP10) mice. This mouse is a model of brain senescence with a short life span, cerebral atrophy and cognitive dysfunction. Mice were fed a diet containing soybean extracts from 1 to 12 months of age. The effects of green and yellow soybean extracts were compared with a control diet without soybean extracts. Cognitive functions were higher in aged mice fed green soybean than age-matched control mice and mice fed yellow soybean. We further investigated transcriptome of the SAMP10 hippocampus indicated that expression levels of 36 genes were significantly higher and 19 genes were lower in mice that ingested green soybean than in mice that ingested yellow soybean. Some of the evidences were reconfirmed by real time PCR analysis; the levels of Cdh1 and Ptgds mRNA were significantly higher and that the level of Aplp1 was significantly lower in aged SAMP10 mice fed green soybean than mice ingested yellow soybean and control mice. Additionally, the amount of amyloid beta 40 and 42 was lower in the insoluble fraction of aged SAMP10 mice fed green soybean than control mice and mice fed yellow soybean, although the levels of amyloid beta 40 and 42 in the soluble fraction were not different. Lipocalin-type prostaglandin D2 synthase (L-PGDS) has been proposed as the endogenous amyloid beta - chaperone, suggesting that amyloid aggregation was lower in mice fed green soybean than control mice and mice fed yellow soybean. These results indicate that the intake of green soybean improved cognitive function in aged mice, and suppressed amyloid beta accumulation. Green soybean might help healthy aging of the brain in older persons.

DESIGN
The effect of green and yellow soybean extracts on cognitive function in aged SAMP10 mice. Mice were fed a CE-2 diet containing 3.0% soybean extracts taken from both yellow and green soybean species, from 1 to 12 months of age. Total RNA was extracted from the stored hippocampus for DNA microarray analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Keiko Unno, Tomokazu Konishi, Aimi Nakagawa, Yoshie Narita, Fumiyo Takabayashi, Hitomi Okamura, Ayane Hara, Hiroyuki Yamamoto, Kazuaki Iguchi, Minoru Hoshino, Kensuke Yasui, Yuki Katayanagi, Ryuta Fukutomi, Shinjiro Imai. Cognitive dysfunction and amyloid ß accumulation are ameliorated by the ingestion of green soybean extract in aged mice. J Funct Foods 14 (2015) 345-353 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jff.2015.02.011

