TITLE
DNA Methylation Predictors of Gene Expression in the 1st Trimester Chorionic Villus: Implications for Prenatal Diagnosis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Placental gene expression is a finely controlled process, yet little is known about the factors that regulate it, including epigenetic factors such as DNA methylation.  In this study, we quantified the effects of DNA methylation on placental gene expression.  Using targeted high throughput sequencing, we generated methylation profiles of 3.7 million CpG dinucleotides from 6 karyotypically normal CVS samples and compared these to gene expression data obtained from a publically available database.  We found a broad association between methylation and gene expression at both the chromosome and individual gene levels.  At the chromosome level, we found alternating domains of high and low methylation.  Within each gene, we found distinct methylation patterns at different regulatory genetic elements.  For example, the promoters of highly expressed genes were neither highly methylated, nor completely unmethylated. Rather, they had < 50% of the CG dinucleotides in their sequences in the methylated state. In contrast, promoters of unexpressed genes tended to be either highly methylated or fully unmethylated. Similarly, patterns of methylation in exons and introns differed between highly expressed and unexpressed genes. Our data show that the relationship between DNA methylation and gene expression is nuanced: highly expressed and unexpressed genes differ, not only by their extent of methylation, but also by minute changes in the locations of their methylation sites.  DNA methylation analysis of placental genes may help predict abnormal placental gene expression and pregnancy complications, making it a possible tool for prenatal diagnosis.

DESIGN
DNA from 6 chorionic villus samples from the 1st trimester (from 3 male and 3 female fetuses) as well as 3 maternal blood cell samples was extracted, hybridized to probes in the Agilent SureSelectXT Methyl-Seq Target Enrichment kit, targeting 84Mb of the genome and then bisulfite converted before sequencing.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

