TITLE
Expression data from breast cancer tumors treated with a single window of the antiangiogenic agent Sunitinib

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
We have witnessed the rise and fall of antiangiogenic therapy in breast cancer (BC). Nevertheless, clinical remissions were observed in patients and we were interested in studying the activity of antiangiogenic drugs in BC. Inefficacy of sunitinib was observed in mouse models of metastatic BC, where evidence of enhanced metastasis was reported, and lack of efficacy of sunitinib-docetaxel combination was recently reported in a phase III clinical trial. Our aim was  to understand the mechanisms and predictors of response to sunitinib in BC in a cohort of patients with untreated locally advanced or operable BC treated with an upfront window of single agent sunitinib, followed by the combination of sunitinib and docetaxel. We have used microarray profiing to monitor the transcriptional changes associated with three distinct stages of treatment: at diagnosis and prior to any treatment (t1), after an upfront window of single agent sunitinib (t2) and after the combined treatment of sunitinib and docetaxel (t3). In addtion, this microarray data also allowed us to observe the  transcriptional changes associated with primary resistance to angiogenic therapy in 4 of 12 patients likely mediated by an adaptive transcriptional response to hypoxia in these resistant tumors. In BC patients this is the first demonstration of primary resistance to antiangiogenic therapy.

DESIGN
Breast cancer samples were colected from human patients (n=8) for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays. Expression profiling on tumor material collected at the three timepoints, diagnosis and prior to any treatment (t1), after an upfront window of single agent Sunitinib (t2) and after the combined treatment of sunitinib and docetaxel (t3), was used to obtain an unbiased view of sunitinib response. Several tumor biopsies and specimens had no frozen sample available or RNA with insufficient quality for expression analysis. Were include in the analysis, at diagnosis (t1), replicated material from patients 4, 5, 6, 7 and 11 (patient 10 had no replica), at day 15 (t2) replicated material from patients 5, 7, 11 and 12 (patient 4 had no replica) and at surgery (t3) replicated material from patients 7, 9, 10, 11 and 12 (patient 6 had no replica)

PLATFORM
GPL6244 [HuGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

