TITLE
Expression data from Epstein-Barr virus infection of immortalized normal oral keratinocytes

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The oral cavity is the persistent reservoir for EBV with lifelong infection of resident epithelial and B cells. Infection of these cell types results in distinct EBV gene expression patterns that are regulated by epigenetic modifications involving DNA methylation and chromatin structure. Such regulation of EBV gene expression relies on viral manipulation of the host epigenetic machinery that may inadvertently result in long-lasting, oncogenic host epigenetic reprogramming. To test this hypothesis in the context of EBV infection of epithelial cells, we established a transient infection model to identify the epigenetic consequences after EBV infection of immortalized normal oral keratinocytes and subsequent viral loss. With mounting evidence that EBV can induce epigenetic alterations, we developed a transient infection model where a clonal derivative (designated cl1) from a human telomerase immortalized normal oral keratinocyte (NOK) cell line was infected with a recombinant Akata EBV carrying neomycin resistance and GfP cassette in place of the BXLF1 open reading frame. Infected cells were passaged ten times, and then selection pressure was removed for an additional ten passages to allow for viral loss. Three transiently-infected EBV-negative clones were identified by single cell cloning (designated cl1, cl3, cl4). Uninfected parental clone and cells transfected with PTRUF5 plasmid were passaged alongside the transiently-infected clones. The transcription profiles were analyzed using Affymetrix microarray U133Plus2.0 arrays in  duplicate.

DESIGN
NOK cells were single cell cloned (designated as cl1) and EBV infected by co-culture with a recombinant Akata EBV strain carrying neomcycin resistance and GFP expression cassette in place of EBV BXLF1.  Cells were selected with 350 ug/ml G418.  As a selection control, cells were transfected a plasmid carrying a neomycin resistance cassette.  Cells were passaged 10 times with G418, followed by removal of selection pressure.  After an additional 10 passages, cells were single cell cloned and the presence of EBV was determined by various methods.  Three clones were identified as being EBV negative and said to be transiently infected.  Uninfected parental and vector transfected cells were passaged in the same manner and also single cell cloned.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
25056883

