TITLE
Aberrant differentiation of glioma stem cells: Implications for therapeutic targeting (GSCs)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
SUMMARY  Terminal differentiation has been proposed as a therapeutic strategy for glioblastoma (GBM). Culturing of GBM derived tumor initiating glioma stem cells (GSCs) in fetal bovine serum containing media is a proposed mode of differentiation that is thought to induce loss of stem cell characteristics, promote neural lineage differentiation and a parallel loss of tumor initiation capacity. Here we show that GSCs retained both neurosphere formation and tumor initiation abilities after short or long term serum exposure. Under serum induced differentiating conditions, GSCs expressed both neural lineage and stem cell markers, highlighting the aberrant pseudo-differentiation state. GSCs maintained under adherent differentiating conditions continued to proliferate and initiate tumor formation with efficiencies similar to GSCs maintained under proliferating (neurosphere) conditions. Proneural (PN) GSCs under serum exposure showed an induction of mesenchymal (MES) gene expression signatures. Our data indicate that the tumor initiation ability of GSCs is independent of their differentiation state and that terminal differentiation as a therapeutic approach may not effectively negate tumorigenicity of GSCs. SIGNIFICANCE  Terminal differentiation has been proposed as a therapeutic strategy for glioblastoma (GBM). Culturing of GBM derived tumor initiating glioma stem cells (GSCs) in fetal bovine serum containing media is a proposed mode of differentiation that is thought to induce loss of stem cell characteristics, promote neural lineage differentiation and a parallel loss of tumor initiation capacity. Here we show that GSCs retained both neurosphere formation and tumor initiation abilities after short or long term serum exposure. Under serum induced differentiating conditions, GSCs expressed both neural lineage and stem cell markers, highlighting the aberrant pseudo-differentiation state. GSCs maintained under adherent differentiating conditions continued to proliferate and initiate tumor formation with efficiencies similar to GSCs maintained under proliferating (neurosphere) conditions. Proneural (PN) GSCs under serum exposure showed an induction of mesenchymal (MES) gene expression signatures. Our data indicate that the tumor initiation ability of GSCs is independent of their differentiation state and that terminal differentiation as a therapeutic approach may not effectively negate tumorigenicity of GSCs.

DESIGN
Gene expression data for 17 isolated Glioma Stem Cells

PLATFORM
GPL17486 Affymetrix GeneChip Human Genome U133A 2.0 Array [CDF: HGU133A2_Hs_ENSG_16.0.0]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

