TITLE
Hyper-excitability of Neurons generated from Patients with Bipolar Disorder

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Bipolar Disorder (BD) is a complex neuropsychiatric disorder that is characterized by intermittent episodes of mania and depression and, without treatment, 15% of patients commit suicide1. Hence, among all diseases, BD has been ranked by the WHO as a top disorder of morbidity and lost productivity2. Previous neuropathological studies have revealed a series of alterations in the brains of BD patients or animal models3, such as reduced glial cell number in the patient prefrontal cortex4, up-regulated activities of the PKA/PKC pathways5-7, and changes in dopamine/5-HT/glutamate neurotransmission systems8-11. However, the roles and causation of these changes in BD are too complex to exactly determine the pathology of the disease; none of the current BD animal models can recapitulate both the manic and depressive phenotypes or spontaneous cycling of BD simultaneously12,13. Furthermore, while some patients show remarkable improvement with lithium treatment, for yet unknown reasons, other patients are refractory to lithium treatment. Therefore, developing an accurate and powerful biological model has been a challenge for research into BD. The development of induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology has provided such a new approach. Here, we developed a human BD iPSC model and investigated the cellular phenotypes of hippocampal dentate gyrus neurons derived from the patient iPSCs. Using patch clamp recording, somatic Ca2+ imaging and RNA-seq techniques, we found that the neurons derived from BD patients exhibited hyperactive action potential (AP) firing, up-regulated expression of PKA/PKC/AP and mitochondria-related genes. Moreover, lithium selectively reversed these alterations in the neurons of patients who responded to lithium treatment. Therefore, hyper-excitability is one endophenotype of BD that is probably achieved through enhancement in the PKA/PKC and Na+ channel signaling systems, and our BD iPSC model can be used to develop new therapies and drugs aimed at clinical treatment of this disease.

DESIGN
total RNAseq from neurons generated from BD patient-specific iPS cells

PLATFORM
GPL16791 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
26524527

