TITLE
Transcriptomic analysis of gastric cancer SGC-7901 cells in response to stable over-expression of intelectin 1

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Gastric cancer is one of the most common cancers worldwide, with approximately 1 million patients being diagnosed annually. Better elucidating the mechanisms of tumorigenesis and aggressiveness is important for improving the therapeutic efficiencies of gastric cancer. Since our previous studies indicate that intelectin 1 (ITLN1) is aberrantly expressed in gastric cancer and serves as a prognostic factor for predicting the outcomes of gastric cancer patients, we hypothesized that ITLN1 might participate in the progression and aggressiveness of gastric cancer. We employed the human whole genome microarray expression profiling as a discovery platform to analyze the transcriptome profiling changes of human gastric cancer SGC-7901 cells in response to stable over-expression of ITLN1. The results showed that stable over-expression of ITLN1 led to altered expression of 1592 human mRNAs, including 547 up-regulated genes and 1045 down-regulated genes. Then we found the possible roles of these differentially regulated mRNAs in selected pathways including cell cycle/proliferation, apoptosis, and cytokine/chemokine responses by Bioinformatic analysis. Furthermore, we validated the microarray results by real-time RT-PCR with high identity. Overall, our results provided fundamental information about the transcriptomic changes in response to ITLN1 over-expression in human gastric cancer cells, and these findings will help us understand the pathogenesis of gastric cancer.

DESIGN
Total RNA of cells stably transfected with empty vector or ITLN1 was extracted using the TRIZOL Reagent according to the manufacturer's instructions. Gene expression profiling was performed for each RNA sample separately on the Agilent Whole Human Genome Oligo Microarray 4×44K at Shanghai Technology Corporation (Shanghai, China), in which GeneChip microarray service was certificated by Agilent.

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
25965823

