TITLE
Human skeletal muscle transcriptome responses to differentiated exercise

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The few investigations on exercise-induced global gene expression responses in human skeletal muscle haves typically focused at one specific mode of exercise and few such studies have implemented control measures. However, interpretation on distinct phenotype regulation necessitate comparison between essentially different modes of exercise and the ability to identify true exercise effects, necessitate implementation of independent non-exercise control subjects. Furthermore, muscle transkriptometranscriptome data made available through previous exercise studies can be difficult to extract and interpret by individuals that are inexperienced with bioinformatic procedures. In a comparative study, we; (1) investigated the human skeletal muscle transcriptome response to differentiated exercise and non-exercise control intervention, and; (2) aimed to develop a straightforward search tool to allow for easy extraction and interpretation of our data. We provide a simple spreadsheet containing transcriptome data allowing other investigators to see how mRNA of their interest behave in skeletal muscle following exercise, both endurance, strength and non-exercise.   Our approach, allow investigators easy access to information on genuine transcriptome effects of differentiated exercise, to better aid hyporthesis-driven question in this particular field of research.

DESIGN
18 subjects were divided into 3 groups, performing 12 weeks of Endurance or Strength training or no training. Biopsies for microarray were take before (Pre) and 2½ and 5 hours after the last training session. Isolated RNA from these biopsies were then measured with the Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL6244 [HuGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Kristian Vissing and Peter Schjerling. Simplified data access on human skeletal muscle transcriptome responses to differentiated exercise. Scientific Data 1, Article number 140041 (2014) http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2014.41

