TITLE
Genome Wide Nucleosome Mapping for HSV-1 shows Nucleosomes are deposited at preferred positions during acute infection

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens ; Human alphaherpesvirus 1

SUMMARY
HSV is a large double stranded DNA virus, capable of causing a variety of diseases from the common cold sore to devastating encephalitis.  Although DNA within the HSV virion does not contain any histone protein, within 1 h of infecting a cell and entering its nucleus the viral genome acquires some histone protein (nucleosomes).  During acute infection, partial micrococcal nuclease (MNase) digestion does not give the classic ladder band pattern, seen on digestion of cell DNA or latent viral DNA.  However, complete digestion does give a mono-nucleosome band, strongly suggesting that there are some nucleosomes present on the viral genome during the acute infection, but that they are not evenly positioned like cell DNA, with a 200bp repeat pattern.  Where then are the nucleosomes positioned?  Here we perform HSV-1 genome wide nucleosome mapping, at a time when viral replication is strong (6hr PI), using a microarray consisting of 50mer oligonucleotides, covering the whole viral genome (152kb).  Arrays were probed with MNase-protected fragments of DNA from infected cells.  Cells were not treated with crosslinking agents, thus we are only mapping tightly bound nucleosomes.  The data show that nucleosome deposition is not random.  The distribution of signal on the arrays suggest that nucleosomes are located at preferred positions on the genome, and that there are some positions that are not occupied (NFR or NDR), or occupied at a low frequency in the population of genomes.  Occupancy of only a fraction of the possible sites may explain the lack of a typical MNase partial digestion band ladder pattern for HSV DNA during acute infection.  On average, DNA encoding Immediate Early, Early and Late genes appear to have a similar density of nucleosomes.  This distribution of nucleosomes is discussed in relation to genome DNA sequence and gene expression.

DESIGN
In total 18 samples; 12 control files (5 different conditions) with the corresponding 8 RIP samples

PLATFORM
GPL18895 Agilent-023349 HSV Histone mapping

CITATIONS
25710170

