TITLE
Establishment of trophoblast stem cells under defined culture conditions in mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The inner cell mass (ICM) and trophoblast cell lineages duet early embryonic development in mammals. After implantation, the ICM forms the embryo proper as well as some extraembryonic tissues, whereas the trophoectoderm (TE) exclusively forms the fetal portion of the placenta and the trophoblast giant cells. Although embryonic stem (ES) cells can be derived from ICM in cultures of mouse blastocysts in the presence of LIF and/or combinations of small-molecule chemical compounds, and the undifferentiated pluripotent state can be stably maintained without use of serum and feeder cells, defined culture conditions for derivation and maintenance of undifferentiated trophoblast stem (TS) cells have not been established. Here, we report that addition of FGF2, activin A, XAV939, and Y27632 are necessary and sufficient for derivation of TS cells from both of E3.5 blastocysts and E6.5 early postimplantation extraembryonic ectoderm. Moreover, the undifferentiated TS cell state can be stably maintained in chemically defined culture conditions. Cells derived in this manner expressed TS cell marker genes, including Eomes, Elf5, Cdx2, Klf5, Cdh1, Esrrb, Sox2, and Tcfap2c; differentiated into all trophoblast subtypes (trophoblast giant cells, spongiotrophoblast, and labyrinthine trophoblast) in vitro; and exclusively contributed to trophoblast lineages in chimeric animals. This delineation of minimal requirements for derivation and self-renewal provides a defined platform for precise description and dissection of the molecular state of TS cells.

DESIGN
Total RNA was purified by using RNeasy Mini kit (QIAGEN). Microarray targets from 200 ng total RNA were synthesized and labelled using the Low RNA Input Linear Amp Kit (Agilent) and hybridized to Mouse 4x44K Ver.2.0 arrays. Arrays were scanned on an Agilent Technologies Microarray scanner and signal intensities were calculated in Agilent Feature Extraction 10.7.3.1 software.

PLATFORM
GPL10333 Agilent-026655 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K v2 (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
25203285

