TITLE
Transcriptome analysis of porcine immune organs following porcine cytomegalovirus infection

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
Porcine cytomegalovirus (PCMV) is a member of the genus Cytomegalovirus, subfamily Betaherpesvirinae, and family Herpesvirus. PCMV is a major immunosuppressive virus that mainly suppress the immune function of T lymphocytes and macrophages. PCMV is widely distributed all over the world, but there are not significantly different serotypes found. Moreover, the molecular mechanisms of host anti-PCMV infection and the molecular immunosuppressive mechanisms of PCMV is still not well charaterized. To understand the PCMV potential impact on the function of immune organs, we performed microarray assay to analyze the transcriptome of porcine immune organs after PCMV infection. We identified 5582 differential expression genes by PCMV infection in microarray.   There are 2161 upregulated genes and 3421 down-regulated by PCMV infection genes compare to the uninfected control group. We confirmed 13 differentially expressed immune-related genes by quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qPCR).      Gene ontology, gene interaction networks and KEGG pathway analysis uncovered the differentially expressed genes interaction regulatory network. These findings indicated that PCMV regulates multiple functional pathways, including immune system process, cellular process, metabolic process, networks of cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, TGF-beta signaling pathway, lymphocytes receptor signaling pathway and TNF signaling pathway.  Our study is the first comprehensive attempt to explore the host transcriptional response to PCMV infection in porcine immune systems. It provided new insights into the immunosuppressive molecular mechanisms and pathogenesis of PCMV. This previously unrecognized endogenous antiviral mechanism has implications for development of host-directed strategies to the prevention and treatment of immunosuppressive viral diseases.

DESIGN
2 samples were analysed. PCMV infected porcine immune organs; control porcine organs. piglets were divided into two groups of five pigs each, and maintained under controlled temperature and humidity. Each pig in the first group was inoculated with 5 ml of 109 PFU/ml PCMV SC strain by intramuscular and intranasal injection, and the other five pigs were injected with 5 ml of RPMI-1640 nutrient solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, UK) as the control. The sera, lymph nodes, spleens, and thymuses of the infected and control pigs were collected at 14 dpi

PLATFORM
GPL16571 Agilent-026440 Sus scrofa (Pig) Oligo Microarray v2 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

