TITLE
The human airway epithelial basal cell transcriptome in the early response to injury

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Basal cells within the human airway epithelium constitute the stem/progenitor cells for other epithelial cell types. Basal cells respond to mucosal injury and damage to the airway mucosa in an ordered sequence of spreading, migration, proliferation and phenotype shifting (differentiation) to other needed cell types. However, dynamic gene transcription in the early events of injury and repair has not been examined in these cells. Methodology and findings: Airway epithelial cells were obtained from donated lungs and grown in submersion culture on pliable membranes to obtain a pure population of basal cells. Microarrays were used to assess the transcriptome of basal cells 8 and 24 hr after mechanical injury (MI), or to cyclic stretch (CS) in a Flexcell system (0.5 Hz, 20% distension), or both treatments. We identified 121 signature genes with > 2-fold higher differential expression (DE) 8 hr after MI; expression of nearly all of these genes returned to baseline at 24 hr after injury. In cells subjected to CS, little change in DE was noted at 8 hr, whereas at 24 hr a CS signature of 1430 DE genes were identified. The MI signature was characterized by genes encoding growth factor receptors related to the EGF pathway, IL-6, IL-8 and IL-33, extracellular matrix components, and NF-kB and p38-MAPK signaling pathways, whereas the CS signature was characterized by a broad range of genes that did not identify specific signaling pathways. Combined MI and CS at 8 hr elicited DE of down-regulated genes not seen with either stimulus alone, and at 24 hr elicited DE that was similar to that seen with CS alone. Conclusion and significance: The human airway basal epithelial cell transcription signature in the first hours after MI, after CS, and after both stimuli identifies unique differentially expressed genes and pathways that may be important in the early molecular response and biology to airway injury.

DESIGN
Total RNA obtained from primary (AEC) and differentiated (dAEC) human airway epithelial cells subjected to 8 or 24 hours in vitro mechanical or cyclic stretch or both injuries compared to sham control as well as to type of injury. Cells were collected from four donated lungs and cultured separated in submission or air liquid interface condition prior to injury for various durations.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

