TITLE
Expression data from islets of non-pregnant and pregnant PRLR+/+ and PRLR-/- mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
ABSTRACT:Pregnancy requires a higher functional beta cell mass and this is associated with profound changes in the gene expression profile of pancreatic islets. Taking Tph1 as a sensitive marker for pregnancy-related islet mRNA expression in female mice, we previously identified prolactin receptors and placental lactogen as key signalling molecules. Since beta cells from male mice also express prolactin receptors, the question arose whether male and female islets have the same phenotypic resilience at the mRNA level during pregnancy. We addressed this question in vitro, by using islet tissue culture with placental lactogen and in vivo, by transplanting male or female islets into female acceptor mice.  Additionally, the islet mRNA expression of pregnant prolactin receptor deficient mice was compared with that of their pregnant wild-type littermates. When cultured with placental lactogen, or transplanted in female recipients that became pregnant (day 12.5), male islets induced the ‘islet pregnancy gene signature’, which we defined as the 12 highest induced genes in non-transplanted female islets at day 12.5 of pregnancy. In addition, serotonin immunoreactivity was also induced in these male transplanted islets at day 12.5 of pregnancy. In order to investigate the importance of prolactin receptors in these mRNA changes we used a prolactin receptor deficient mouse model. For the 12 genes of the signature, which are highly induced in control pregnant mice, no significant induction of mRNA transcripts was found at day 9.5 of pregnancy. Together, our results support the key role of placental lactogen as a circulating factor that can trigger the pregnancy mRNA profile in male and female beta cells.

DESIGN
Islets were isolated from non-prengant (NP) and pregnant (day 9.5) PRLR+/+ and PRLR-/- mice for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays. For every condition 3 biological replicates were used.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
25816302

