TITLE
Microarray analysis adherent peripheral blood mononuclear cells stimulated with IL-10, IL-15, and IL-4

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Tuberculosis remains a major cause of death from an infectious disease worldwide, yet only 10% of people infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis develop disease.  Defining both necessary and sufficient immunologic determinants of protection remains a great scientific challenge.  Analysis of peripheral blood gene expression profiles of active tuberculosis patients has identified correlates of risk for disease or pathogenesis.  We sought to identify human potential candidate markers of host defense by studying gene expression profiles of macrophages, cells which, upon infection by M. tuberculosis, can mount an antimicrobial response.  Weighted gene co-expression network analysis revealed an association between the cytokine, IL-32, and the vitamin D antimicrobial pathway in a network of IFN-γ and IL-15 induced ‘defense response’ genes.  IL-32 was sufficient for induction of the vitamin D-dependent antimicrobial peptides, cathelicidin and DEFB4, and generation of antimicrobial activity in vitro, dependent on the presence of adequate 25-hydroxyvitamin D.  The IL-15 induced ‘defense response’ macrophage gene network was integrated with ranked pairwise comparisons of gene expression from five different clinical data sets of latent vs. active tuberculosis or healthy controls, and a co-expression network derived from gene expression in patients with tuberculosis undergoing chemotherapy.  Together, these analyses identified eight common genes, including IL-32, as molecular markers of latent tuberculosis and the IL-15 induced gene network.  Inferring that maintaining M. tuberculosis in a latent state and preventing transition to active disease represents host resistance, we believe these results identify IL-32 as one functional marker and potential correlate of protection against active tuberculosis.

DESIGN
Adherent peripheral blood monuclear cells were derived by Ficoll-Hypaque from the whole blood of four healthy donors.  Cells adhered to tissue culture-treated plates for 2 h in 1% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) in RPMI.  Cells were washed then stimulated with IL-10 (10ng/ml), IL-15 (10ng/ml) (R & D Systems), or IL-4 (1U/ml) in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FBS at 37°C, 5% CO2. Cells were harvested at 6 h and 24 h after stimulation and monocytes purified by CD14 microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec) for a confirmed monocyte purity of at least 90%.   RNA from purified monocytes extracted by Trizol and purified by Qiagen RNeasy Kit.  RNA probe and microarray performed by UCLA Clinical Microarray Core using Ambion labeling kit and Affymetrix Human U133 Plus 2.0 array.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
25143364

