TITLE
Analysis of Molecular Alterations in Oral Cell Lines [mRNA]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
BACKGROUND: Cell lines have been developed for  modeling cancer and cancer progression. The molecular  background of these cell lines is often unknown to those  using them to model disease behaviors. As molecular  alterations are the ultimate drivers of cell phenotypes,  having an understanding of the molecular make-up of  these systems is critical for understanding the disease  biology modeled.  METHODS: Six immortalized normal, one immortalized  dysplasia, one self-immortalized dysplasia, and two  primary normal cell lines derived from oral tissues were  analyzed for DNA copy number changes and changes in  both mRNA and miRNA expression using SMRT-v.2  genome-wide tiling comparative genomic hybridization  arrays, Agilent Whole Genome 4x44k expression arrays,  and Exiqon V2.M-RT-PCR microRNA Human panels.  RESULTS: DNA copy number alterations were detected  in both normal and dysplastic immortalized cell lines—as  well as in the single non-immortalized dysplastic cell line.  These lines were found to have changes in expression of  genes related to cell cycle control as well as alterations in  miRNAs that are deregulated in clinical oral squamous  cell carcinoma tissues. Immortal lines—whether normal  or dysplastic—had increased disruption in expression  relative to primary lines. All data are available as a public  resource.  CONCLUSIONS: Molecular profiling experiments have  identified DNA,mRNA,andmiRNAalterations for a panel  of normal and dysplastic oral tissue cell lines. These data  are a valuable resource to those modeling diseases of the  oral mucosa, and give insight into the selection of model  cell lines and the interpretation of data from those lines.

DESIGN
Total RNA from oral cancer cell lines were hybridized to Agilent 4x44k gene expression microarray

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
25169794

