TITLE
Characterising Host Gene Expression during the Recovery from Hepatic Schistosomiasis Japonica

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
In schistosomiasis japonica, the egg-induced granulomatous response and the development of extensive hepatic fibrosis is the main pathology. Information regarding the specific mechanisms associated with granuloma regression and the subsequent recovery events in the host liver are still limited. In this study, a murine model of schistosomiasis japonica was used to characterise the multicellular pathways occurring during liver regeneration. Schistosoma japonicum-infected C57BL/6 mice were administered with the drug praziquantel (PZQ), on a daily basis for five consecutive days to eliminate all adult parasites. The pathological changes of PZQ-treated groups after 3, 6 and 7 weeks post PZQ treatment were examined, along with the assessment of cellular infiltration to the liver. PZQ treatment significantly reduced the degree of splenomegaly, granuloma density and the collagen deposition of liver fibrosis. The infiltration of inflammatory cells, including neutrophils, eosinophils and macrophages to the liver were as well significantly decreased. Transcriptomic analysis revealed the significant up-regulation of fatty acid metabolism genes and the identification of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPAR-α) as the upstream regulator during the process of liver recovery. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) signalling pathway that is involved primarily in the regulation of hepatic enzymes responsible for xenobiotic metabolism was as well differentially up-regulated. These findings indicate that schistosome egg-induced fibrogenesis process is reversible, and provide a better understanding of the regression mechanisms associated with hepatic schistosomiasis. These results hold important implications for the future alleviation of this and other fibrotic diseases of clinical significance.

DESIGN
C57BL/6 murine model infected with S. japonicum were treated orally with Praziquantel (PZQ) after 7 weeks post infection to examine the hepatic regression process following drug treatment. These PZQ-treated, non PZQ-treated and uninfected mice were then euthanised at 10, 13, and 14 weeks p.i. Livers were collected from each mice, and subjected to total RNA isolation and gene expression analysis. Microarray analysis of this study was performed using samples derived from 3 individual mice per group/time-point.

PLATFORM
GPL6885 Illumina MouseRef-8 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

