TITLE
Expression profiling of peripheral blood of chronic HCV infection

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In the present study, we studied chronic HCV patients who responded to IFN-based therapy as evidenced by absence of HCV RNA at the end of treatment, and focused on two issues that have not received much attention. Firstly, we evaluated whether specific genes or gene expression patterns in blood were able to distinguish responder patients with a viral relapse from responder patients who remained virus-negative after cessation of treatment. We found that chronic HCV patients who were sustained responders and relapsers to IFN-based therapy showed comparable baseline clinical parameters and immune composition in blood. However, at baseline, the gene expression profiles of a set of 18 genes predicted treatment outcome with an accuracy of 94%. Secondly, we examined whether patients with successful therapy-induced clearance of HCV still exhibited gene expression patterns characteristic for HCV, or whether normalization of their transcriptome was observed. We observed that the relatively high expression of IFN-stimulated genes (ISG) in chronic HCV patients prior to therapy was reduced after successful IFN-based antiviral therapy (at 24 weeks follow-up). These ISG included CXCL10, OAS1, IFI6, DDX60, TRIM5 and STAT1. In addition, 1428 differentially expressed non-ISG genes were identified in paired pre- and post-treatment samples from sustained responders, which included genes involved in TGF-β signaling, apoptosis, autophagy, and nucleic acid and protein metabolism. Interestingly, 1424 genes were identified with altered expression in responder patients after viral eradication in comparison to normal expression levels in healthy individuals. Additionally, aberrant expression of a subset of these genes, including IL-32, IL-16, CCND3 and RASSF1, was also observed at baseline.  Our findings indicate that successful antiviral therapy of chronic HCV patients does not lead to normalization of their blood transcriptional signature. The altered transcriptional activity may reflect HCV-induced liver damage in previously infected individuals.

DESIGN
A genome-wide gene expression analysis was performed on a blood cohort of 59 chronic HCV patients and 20 healthy controls. The expression profiles of patients who responded to IFN-based therapy, who developed a viral relapse were compared respectively to the profiles of healthy controls. Pre- and post-treatment expression profiles of same responders were compared as well.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
25100847

