TITLE
Gene expression in Galectin-3 KO vs. WT CD8 T cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The goal of this study was to examine differences in gene expression of tumor specific CD8 T cells in an in vivo tumor mouse model after inhibition of galectin-3 protein expression by genetic knockout.  Galectin-3 is thought to modulate CD8 T cell response by cross-linking cell surface glycoproteins Galectin-3 is a 31 kD carbohydrate-binding lectin that is over-expressed by many human malignancies.  It also modulates T cell responses through a diverse array of mechanisms including induction of apoptosis, TCR cross linking in CD8+ T cells, and T cell receptor (TCR) down regulation in CD4+ T cells.      We found that patients responding to a granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) secreting allogeneic pancreatic tumor vaccine developed post immunization antibody responses to galectin-3 on a proteomic screen.  We used the HER-2/neu (neu-N) transgenic mouse model to study galectin-3 binding on adoptively transferred high avidity neu-specific CD8+ T cells derived from TCR transgenic mice.  Here, we show that galectin-3 binds preferentially to activated antigen-committed CD8+ T cells only in the tumor microenvironment (TME).  Galectin-3 deficient mice exhibit improved CD8+ T cell effector function and increased expression of several inflammatory genes when compared with wild type (WT) mice.  We also show that galectin-3 binds to LAG-3, and LAG-3 expression is necessary for galectin-3 mediated suppression of CD8+ T cells in vitro.  Lastly, galectin-3 deficient mice have significantly elevated levels of circulating plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), which are superior to conventional dendritic cells (cDCs) in activating CD8+ T cells.    Binding of galectin-3 to cell-surface glycoproteins on immune cells suppresses a pro-inflammatory immune response.  Thus, inhibiting galectin-3 in conjunction with CD8+ T cell directed immunotherapies should enhance the tumor specific immune response.

DESIGN
3 different experimental groups were studied.  Galectin-3 WT CD8 T cells adoptively transferred into Galectin-3 WT mice, galectin-3 WT CD8 T cells transferred into galectin-3 KO mice, and finally galectin-3 KO CD8 T cells transferred into galectin-3 KO mice.  Galectin-3 WT CD8 T cells transferred into Galectin-3 WT mice were used as the reference group.  Four biological replicates were submitted for each group, and adoptively transfered CD8 T cells were isolated 5 days post-adoptive transfer into tumor-bearing mice treated with a whole cell GM-CSF secreting vaccine.  Cells were purified by cell sorting on the Thy1.2 surface marker.

PLATFORM
GPL6096 [MoEx-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Exon 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
25691328

