TITLE
RMECs: hypoxia-induced group vs. paired untreated group

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Objective To explore the molecular mechanisms of retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) at whole genome scale using cultivated human fetal retinal microvascular endothelial cells (RMECs) under hypoxic condition.  Study design Aborted fetuses with mean gestational age of 20-28 weeks at Guangdong Women and Children’ Hospital were enrolled, 3 males and 2 females, with mean weight 610-2205 g. Primary RMECs were isolated by mechanical morcel and trypsin-collagenase digestion of eyeballs. Cultivated cells were treated with or without 150 μM CoCl2 for 72 h. The dual-color microarray approach was adopted to compare gene expression profiling between treated RMECs and the paired untreated control using Agilent SurePrint G3 Human GE 8x60K Microarray Kit. We applied average-linkage unsupervised hierarchical clustering and TreeView to visualize the results. The one class algorithm in the SAM software was used to screen the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) with a threshold set at fold-change > 2.0 and q-value < 0.05. Gene Ontology was employed for functional enrichment analysis.   Results There were 326 DEGS between the hypoxia-induced group and untreated group. Of these genes, 198 were up-regulated in hypoxic RMECs, while other 128 hits were down-regulated. More importantly, altered expression genes in iron ion homeostasis pathway were highly enriched under hypoxic condition. Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed to validate the results obtained from microarray analysis.  Conclusions Dysregulation of genes involved in iron homeostasis mediating oxidative damage may contribute to the ROP pathogenesis.

DESIGN
Primary RMECs isolated from five subjects (3 males, 2 females) with mean weight 610-2205 g. CoCl2 induced hypoxia in primary RMECs vs. cultured cells without CoCl2 treatment. Biological replicates: five treated RMECs and paired untreated control. Dye-swap assays were performed for each sample.

PLATFORM
GPL14550 Agilent-028004 SurePrint G3 Human GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name Version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

