TITLE
Gene expression profiles at the day 5 blastocyst implantation and interimplantation sites of the hamster [human array]

ORGANISM
Mesocricetus auratus

SUMMARY
Current knowledge of the molecular regulation of the blastocyst implantation event has been largely derived from studies in the mouse that requires ovarian estrogen for initiation of the implantation event. However, there are species such as the hamster, guinea pig, pig, horse, rhesus monkey and perhaps the human where the blastocyst implantation event initiates only in the progesterone-primed uterus. Despite this fundamental difference in the requirement of ovarian hormones in initiating blastocyst implantation among species, efforts to identify gene networks relevant for the blastocyst implantation event in progesterone–dependent species are limited. In this study, cDNA prepared from RNAs of day 5 blastocyst implantation and interimplantation sites were hybridized with mouse and human oligonucleotide microarray platforms to discern the transcriptional networks underlying the regulation of blastocyst implantation in hamsters. Compared with the inter-implantation site, blastocyst implantation sites showed upregulation and downregulation of a sizable number of genes by both cross-species arrays.The merit of the cross-species hybridization and reliability of the identified up- and down-regulated genes at the implantation sites were validated by detecting differential expression of a few randomly selected genes from both arrays by real-time PCR. Function gene ontology and pathway analysis revealed that differentially expressed genes are associated with several biological events and molecular pathways that are likely to be taking place at the blastocyst implantation site. This is the first study that identified the differential gene expression profile at the blastocyst implantation site of the hamsters, and revealed molecular pathways that are possibly associated with the progesterone-dependent blastocyst implantation process. We used microarrays to detail the expression differences in hamster implantation and interimplantation sites.

DESIGN
Total RNAs were prepared from the hamster day 5 blastocyst implantation and interimplantation sites. Three sets of RNAs were isolated from three different animals and were subjected to microarray analysis using Affymetrix mouse and human array platforms.

PLATFORM
GPL96 [HG-U133A] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A Array

CITATIONS
25252651

