TITLE
Expression profiles of 30-gene hepatocellular carcinoma molecular classification signature in surgically resected Japanese hepatocellular carcinoma patients

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background & Aims:  Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second most lethal cancer due to lack of effective therapies. Although promising, HCC molecular classification, which enriches potential responders to specific therapies, has not yet been assessed in clinical trials of anti-HCC drugs. We aimed to overcome these challenges by developing clinicopathological surrogate indices of HCC molecular classification. Methods:  HCC classification defined in our previous transcriptome meta-analysis (S1, S2, and S3 subclasses) was implemented in an FDA-approved diagnostic platform (Elements assay, NanoString). Ninety-six HCC tumors (training set) were assayed to develop molecular subclass-predictive indices based on clinicopathological features, which were independently validated in 99 HCC tumors (validation set). Molecular deregulations associated with the histopathological features were determined by pathway analysis. Sample sizes for HCC clinical trials enriched with specific molecular subclasses were determined. Results: HCC subclass-predictive indices were: steatohepatitic (SH)-HCC variant and immune cell infiltrate for S1 subclass, macrotrabecular/compact pattern, lack of pseudoglandular pattern, and high serum alpha-fetoprotein ( > 400 ng/mL) for S2 subclass, and microtrabecular pattern, lack of SH-HCC and clear cell variants, and lower histological grade for S3 subclass. Macrotrabecular/compact pattern, a predictor of S2 subclass, was associated with activation of therapeutically targetable oncogene YAP and stemness markers EPCAM/KRT19. BMP4 was associated with pseudoglandular pattern. Subclass-predictive indices-based patient enrichment reduced clinical trial sample sizes from 121, 184, and 53 to 30, 43, and 22 for S1, S2, and S3 subclass-targeting therapies, respectively. Conclusions: HCC molecular subclasses can be enriched by clinicopathological indices tightly associated with deregulation of therapeutically targetable molecular pathways.

DESIGN
96 surgically resected hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissue specimens from a cohort of 88 Japanese patients.

PLATFORM
GPL18976 NanoString nCounter Human HCC classification assay

CITATIONS
26058462

