TITLE
DNA methylation changes in fetal germ cells exposed to endocrine disruptors and in the next generation [methylation set 2]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
According to recent reports, exposure to environmental endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDs) during pregnancy may harm multiple subsequent generations. We hypothesized that EDs must directly alter DNA methylation and/or transcription in the exposed fetal germ cells to affect the grandchild. In addition, the aberrant pattern must be retained in the germ cells of the grandchild -- withstanding global epigenome remodeling -- to affect the great-grandchild. To test this hypothesis, we extensively searched for immediate and persistent epigenetic effects in purified germ cells of the exposed fetus and those of the next generation. We treated gestating female mice with previously validated doses of vinclozolin (VZ), bisphenol A (BPA), di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP), or control oil, during the time when the prospermatogonia of the exposed fetus undergo global de novo DNA methylation. Using genome-wide assays, we detected changes in transcription and DNA methylation in the exposed prospermatogonia but these did not persist into the prospermatogonia of the next generation. There was no evidence for transgenerational inheritance of these epigenetic aberrations. Our results suggest that EDs exert direct epigenetic effects in the exposed fetal germ cells, but the germline corrects against deleterious effects in the next generation.

DESIGN
Pregnant mice were gavaged daily with endocrine distruptors (VZ at 100 mg/kg/day, DEHP at 750 mg/kg/day, BPA at 0.2 mg/kg/day or control oil) starting at 12.5 days post coitum (dpc) and the G1R germ cells were purified from the exposed fetuses at 17.5 dpc. The G2R germ cells were purified from fetuses that were sired by males that had been treated in utero in a G0 mother. G1R spermatozoa were collected from adult males that had been treated in utero at the fetal stages. G2R spermatozoa were collected from adult males who were sired by in-uteo-treated males.

PLATFORM
GPL16978 NimbleGen custom mouse imprinted array [110228_MM9_PS_ChIP]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

