TITLE
Divergent influence of microRNA-21 deletion on murine colitis phenotypes [TNBS]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background:  MicroRNAs (miRNAs) acting as negative regulators of gene expression are differentially expressed in intestinal tissues of patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Assessing the functional role of miRNAs in murine models of colitis facilitates elucidating the role of specific miRNAs in human IBD.  The aim of this study was to determine the miRNA signature of murine models of colitis and to assess the influence of miR-21 on intestinal inflammation.   Methods: miRNAs expression was accessed by microarray for acute and chronic murine model of colitis induced by DSS or TNBS. miR-21-deficient mouse and littermates controls were assessed in the standard DSS, TNBS and CD4+ T cell transfer models of colitis. RNAs of mouse colon and CD4+CD45RBHigh cells were analyzed by miRNA and mRNA microarray, and quantitative RT-PCR. Th1 polarization was accessed by flow-cytometry and ELISA. Results:  Alterations of in miRNAs expression were identified for acute and chronic DSS colitis and TNBS colitis, receptively.  The Expression of miRs-21, -142-3p and -223 was were distinct between DSS and TNBS models while overlap of numerous miRNAs was seen. Importantly, miRs-19b, -192 and -215, that are decreased in IBD, were significantly decreased in all 4 models of colitis. miR-21, which is increased in IBD, was increased in TNBS colitis but not the DSS colitis models.  Further assessment of the miR-21-deficient 1-/- mice revealed that the deletion of miR-21 results in the exacerbation of both the TNBS and T cell-transfer models of colitis.  Conclusions:  miRNAs are differentially expressed in both human IBD and murine colitis, with overlap of several IBD-associated miRNAs.  The demonstration that miR-21 deletion exacerbated CD4+ T cell-mediated models of colitis provides further evidence that miRNAs play significant roles in the pathogenesis of IBD.

DESIGN
miRNAs expression was accesed for acute and chronic murine model of colitis induced by DSS or TNBS.Total of 20 samples with duplicates were analyed in this study.

PLATFORM
GPL7723 miRCURY LNA microRNA Array, v.11.0 - hsa, mmu & rno

CITATIONS
25222661

