TITLE
Functional phenotypes alteration on dendritic cells between tolerance and immnunity

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Dendritic cells (DC) are key regulators of immunological responses, immunity and tolerance. Due to their differentiation capacities, they have emerged as a promising tool for therapeutic applications. However, there are poorly understood functional DC-specific markers and cellular mechanisms for in-vitro research and clinical usage.   This study’s aim is to evaluate the gene expression profiling of  up-regulated or down-regulated by DC maturation and explore their function.   The dendritic cells were prepared using GM-CSF and IL-4 (imDC) and subsequently maturated by adding type II collagen as antigen with LPS (mDC) or TNF-alpha(tDC). Also, surface markers, cytokine profiles, and induction of Treg cell were examined in same DC. Then, transcriptional profile was analyzed by using cDNA microarray and gene clustering programs. The selected genes, marker candidates were validated by using quantitative real-time PCR.   By supervised selection, we identified 75 signitures , which 63 genes were consistently upregulated in mDC and 12 genes  were expressed only in tDC . In addition, we introduced 10 genes overexpressed or equally expressed in both tDC and mDC.  These selected genes were clustered into various functional categories according to GO ontology analysis. Hspa1 and Scin as tDC-specific genes, Orm1, Pdlim4, and Enpp2 as mDC-specific genes were found correlation between microarray data and mRNA expression by qRT-PCR.   This work may contribute to identifying specific modulating markers for mDC and tDC, which could in the future serve as therapeutic targets in the treatment of cancer and autoimmune diseases.

DESIGN
Total RNA obtained from isolate Bone-marrow derived Dendritic cell subset, immature DC, semi-mature or tolerogenic DC, and fully mature DC were generated in-vitro, used microarray Chip : Illumina MouseRef-8 v2 Expression BeadChip

PLATFORM
GPL6885 Illumina MouseRef-8 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
26699759

