TITLE
P. falciparum Complicated Malaria: Modulation and Connectivity between Exportome and Variant Surface Gene Families

ORGANISM
Plasmodium falciparum

SUMMARY
In temperate and sub-tropical regions of Latin America, complicated malaria manifested as hepatic dysfunction or renal dysfunction is seen in all age groups. There has been a concerted focus on understanding the patho-physiological and molecular basis of complicated malaria in children, much less is known about it in adults. This can be attributed to many factors: one of which is the expression of clonally variant families of adhesion proteins: PfEMP1 on the iRBC surface. We report here, the analysis of data from a custom, cross strain microarray (Agilent Platform) using material from patient samples, showing hepatic dysfunction or renal failure. These are the most common manifestations seen in adults along with cerebral malaria. The data has been analyzed with reference to variable surface antigens, encoded by the var, rifin and stevor gene families. The differential regulation profiles of key genes (comparison of PFC and PFU) have been observed. The exportome has been analyzed using similar parameters. GO term based functional enrichment of differentially regulated genes identified, up-regulated genes stastically enriched (p < 0.5) to critical biological processes. Systems network based functional enrichment of overall differentially regulated genes yielded a similar result. We are reporting here, up-regulation of var group A and B genes whose proteins are predicted to interact with CD36 receptor in the host as also the up-regulation of group A rifins and many of the stevors. This is contrary to most other reports from pediatric patients, with cerebral malaria where the up-regulation of var A group genes have been seen. A protein-protein interaction based network has been created and analysis performed. This co-expression and text mining based network has shown overall connectivity between the variable surface antigens and the exportome. The up-regulation of var group B and C genes encoding PfEMP1 with different domain architecture would be important for deciding strategies for disease prevention.

DESIGN
Plasmodium falciparum isolates were collected from patients (n=12) with differing clinical conditions. The patients exhibited symptoms categorized as uncomplicated (n=5) or complicated malaria (n=7). Criteria for determination of complicated disease were based on World Health Organization year 2000 guidelines. Microarray array based transcriptional profiling was carried out to find out differentailly expressed genes in complicated malaria isolates (non-cerebral malaria) compared to un-complicated malaria isolates.

PLATFORM
GPL18192 Agilent Custom P. falciparum 8x15k Array designed by Ashis Das, Raja CM & Genotypic Technology Pvt. Ltd. (AMADID:24956)

CITATIONS
26022315

