TITLE
Wash regulates lamin-dependent nuclear genome organization [Chromatin Accessibility]

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
The cytoplasmic functions of Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome family (WASP) proteins are well known and include roles in cytoskeleton reorganization and membrane-cytoskeletal interactions important for membrane/vesicle trafficking, morphogenesis, immune response and signal transduction. Mis-regulation of these proteins is associated with immune deficiency and metastasis. Cytoplasmic WASP proteins act as effectors of Rho family GTPases and polymerize branched actin through the Arp2/3 complex. However, recent evidence has revealed that this classically cytoplasmic protein family also functions in the nucleus. Previously, we identified Drosophila washout (wash) as a new member of the WASP family with essential cytoplasmic roles in early development. Here we show that Wash is also present in the nucleus and plays a key role in nuclear organization via its interaction with Lamin Dm0 at the nuclear envelope. Wash and Lamin Dm0 occupy similar genomic regions that overlap with transcriptionally silent chromatin including constitutive heterochromatin. Strikingly, wash mutant and knockdown nuclei exhibit the same abnormal wrinkled morphology observed in diverse laminopathies, including the Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome, and consistent with disruption of the nuclear organization of several sub-nuclear structures including cajal bodies and the chromocenter in salivary glands. We also found that Wash and Lamin knockdown disrupt chromatin accessibility of repressive compartments in agreement with an observed global redistribution of repressive histone modifications. Functional genetic approaches show wash mutants exhibit similar phenotypes to lamin Dm0 mutants, suggesting they participate in similar regulatory networks. Our results reveal a novel role for Wash in modulating nuclear organization via its interaction with the nuclear envelope protein Lamin Dm0. These findings highlight the functional complexity of WASP family proteins and provide new venues to understand their molecular roles in cell biology and disease. We evaluated the effect of Wash knockdown in S2R+ cells on chromatin accessibility using an M.SssI-based approach.

DESIGN
To establish the effects of Wash and Lamin depletion on chromatin organization, we performed a M.SssI-based chromatin accessibility assay. Upon knockdown, nuclei were isolated and incubated with the bacterial methylase M.SssI for 20 min. Genomic DNA was recovered and sonicated in order to obtain 300-1000 bp fragments. DNA was denatured and incubated with anti-5 methylcytosine (clone 33A3; Cat. No. 39649; Active Motif) to immunoprecipitate methylated DNA. M.SssI methylated DNA was amplified, labeled and hybridized on arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL6888 Henikoff_Dmel_r52_ChIP tiling design

CITATIONS
25754639

