TITLE
Wash regulates lamin-dependent nuclear genome organization [DamID]

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
The cytoplasmic functions of Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome family (WASP) proteins are well known and include roles in cytoskeleton reorganization and membrane-cytoskeletal interactions important for membrane/vesicle trafficking, morphogenesis, immune response and signal transduction. Mis-regulation of these proteins is associated with immune deficiency and metastasis. Cytoplasmic WASP proteins act as effectors of Rho family GTPases and polymerize branched actin through the Arp2/3 complex. However, recent evidence has revealed that this classically cytoplasmic protein family also functions in the nucleus. Previously, we identified Drosophila washout (wash) as a new member of the WASP family with essential cytoplasmic roles in early development. Here we show that Wash is also present in the nucleus and plays a key role in nuclear organization via its interaction with Lamin Dm0 at the nuclear envelope. Wash and Lamin Dm0 occupy similar genomic regions that overlap with transcriptionally silent chromatin including constitutive heterochromatin. Strikingly, wash mutant and knockdown nuclei exhibit the same abnormal wrinkled morphology observed in diverse laminopathies, including the Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome, and consistent with disruption of the nuclear organization of several sub-nuclear structures including cajal bodies and the chromocenter in salivary glands. We also found that Wash and Lamin knockdown disrupt chromatin accessibility of repressive compartments in agreement with an observed global redistribution of repressive histone modifications. Functional genetic approaches show wash mutants exhibit similar phenotypes to lamin Dm0 mutants, suggesting they participate in similar regulatory networks. Our results reveal a novel role for Wash in modulating nuclear organization via its interaction with the nuclear envelope protein Lamin Dm0. These findings highlight the functional complexity of WASP family proteins and provide new venues to understand their molecular roles in cell biology and disease. DamID chromatin profiling demostrate that Wash binds similar regions to those bound by Lamin Dm0, in particular transcriptional silent chromatin

DESIGN
To establish Wash and Lamin chromatin profiles, Kc167 cells were transfected with the Dam methylase fused to Wash or Lamin cDNAs and compared to the Dam methylase alone. Experiments were performed triplicates (Biological replicates). 10e6 cells were electroporated and incubated for 48 h at 250C. Genomic DNA was recovered and digested with DpnI overnight at 37C. A 5-30% sucrose gradient was used to recover a DNA fragments range between 0.3-2.5Kb.

PLATFORM
GPL19004 NimbleGen Drosophila DM2 WG CGH Whole Genome tiling array

CITATIONS
25754639

