TITLE
Genomic and epigenomic architectures of monozygotic twins discordant for child acute lymphoblastic leukemia

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
DNA methylation appears to play an essential mechanistic role in the pathogenesis of ALL, thereby potentiate its use as a biomarker for diagnosis and prognosis (Milani, Lundmark et al. 2010; Geng, Brennan et al. 2012; Sandoval, Heyn et al. 2013), and even a potential target of novel therapeutic approaches in ALL. In present study, we collected blood specimens for 4 pairs of monozygotic  twins (MZ) and 1 pair of dizygotic twin (DZ) that are discordant for ALL. We sought to comprehensively assess the magnitude of genetic and epigenetic differences between ALL-affected and unaffected twins. we conducted whole genome and whole methylome sequencing on these five pairs of ALL-discordant twins. We also examined both the MZ and DZ twins using whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS). At first, the methylation differences across the genome were addressed globally by Circos software. And then tried to characterize the co-twin methylation divergence in specific genomic regions between ALL-discordant twin pairs. These patterns of dynamic co-twin methylation changes in these discordant ALL samples were generally consistent among MZ and DZ twins, indicating similarities of methylation abnormalities. As a result, 780, 566, 309, 293 and 2110 DMRs were identified, with a similar distribution pattern across different genomic elements among the five twin pairs.Then we annotate whether these DMRs were located in regulatory elements and identification of genes with recurring methylation alterations in a cohort of ALL patients.

DESIGN
We collected blood specimens from 4 pairs of MZ twins and 1 pair of DZ twin that are discordant for ALL. At first, the methylation differences across the genome were addressed globally by Circos software. And then tried to characterize the co-twin methylation divergence in specific genomic regions and differentially methylated gene regions (DMRs) were identified between ALL-discordant twin pairs. Then we annotate whether these DMRs were located in regulatory elements and identification of genes with recurring methylation alterations in a cohort of ALL patients.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

LIBSTRATS
:BISULFITE-SEQ
