TITLE
miRNA expression profiles from neurogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells under conditioned microenvironments

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Background:   Studies suggested that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have intrinsic neurogenic potential and can be differentiated into neural stem cell/ neural progenitor cells (NPCs) under specific microenvironment. Manipulation of growth factors is one of the popular method to achieve trans-lineage differentiation of MSCs. Synergistic effect of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and fibroblast growth factor 2 (bFGF) have been widely identified as basic requirement for neural differentiation to take place. Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) also known as somatomedin C is an important growth promoting protein during embryonic development which control numerous cellular responses and biological systems. Our recent study has found that the combination of EGF, bFGF and IGF-1 could significantly improved the growth and survivability of MSCs-derived NPCs. Therefore, to understand the genomic mechanism underlying the differentiation in vitro, we have studied the miRNAs profile of MSCs-derived NPCs under IGF-1 influenced conditioned microenvironments. Objectives:   To evaluate the effects of IGF-1 in trans-lineage differentiation of MSCs, we have induced MSCs into neural lineage in 3 groups; Group A (positive control) - EGF+bFGF, Group B (Treatment) - EGF+bFGF+IGF-1, and Group C (negative control/ untreated). To unravel the role of regulatory miRNAs involved in the early differentiation, we have performed detailed miRNA profiling for MSCs-derived NPCs at three time intervals (day 1, day 3 and day 5). The data has explored crucial miRNAs involved in early differentiation of MSCs into NPCs.

DESIGN
Stage specific MSCs-derived NPCs at Passage 1 were collected for total RNA extraction at three time-points (D1, D3 and D5) and hybridization on Affymetrix miRNA geneChip 2.0 arrays. Each experiment were repeated three times independently (Exp 1, Exp 2 and Exp 3). Group A served as positive control (EGF+bFGF), Group B as treatment (EGF+bFGF+IGF-1) and Group C without growth factor as negative control.

PLATFORM
GPL14613 [miRNA-2] Affymetrix Multispecies miRNA-2 Array

CITATIONS
25938966

