TITLE
Long Serial Analysis of Gene Expression (LongSAGE) of Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) brain tissue.

ORGANISM
Oncorhynchus tshawytscha

SUMMARY
Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) display the greatest variability of return times to freshwater of all Pacific salmon. Populations return to freshwater for spawning at many different times of year, resulting in segregated populations that may use differing molecular pathways for these large behavioral and physiological differences. Using a population of Chinook from California’s Central Valley, we sought to generate novel expressed sequences using Long Serial Analysis of Gene Expression (LongSAGE). We constructed three LongSAGE libraries from brains of samples caught in the spring and fall in freshwater and from the ocean. Using cDNA libraries from Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) and rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), we were able to assign 59% of putatively differentially expressed tags to genes. Additionally, we tested the expression levels of seven genes, indicated by LongSAGE to be putatively differentially expressed between the fall and spring, and found none significantly differentially expressed. This study is the first to apply LongSAGE to salmon and provides a framework for conducting future research on gene expression differences between Chinook salmon of different populations, as well as underlying mechanisms of differing physiology and behavior. Keywords: seasonal difference

DESIGN
Single individuals were used to construct each LongSAGE library.  The fall, spring and ocean samples were then compared between each other and examined for differences in the number of tags observed.

PLATFORM
GPL4407 SAGE:17:NlaIII:Oncorhynchus tshawytscha

CITATIONS
J C Bernier, S R Birkeland, M J Cipriano, Andrew G McArthur, M A Banks. Differential gene expression between fall and spring run Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) assessed by long serial analysis of gene expression (LongSAGE). Transactions of the American Fisheries Society. 2008;137:1378-1388.

