TITLE
Distinct pathways of pathogenesis in mice with experimental cerebral malaria following P. berghei ANKA infection.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Cerebral malaria (CM) is a severe complication of Plasmodium falciparum infection, predominantly experienced by children and non-immune adults, which results in great mortality and long-term sequelae. Recent reports based on histology of post-mortem brain tissue suggest that CM may be the common end point for a range of syndromes. Here, we have analysed the gene expression profiles in brain tissue taken from experimental CM (ECM)-susceptible, Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbA)-infected C57BL/6 (B6) and CBA/CaH (CBA) mice with ECM. Gene expression profiles were largely heterogeneous between the two ECM-susceptible strains. These results, combined with experimental data, support the existence of distinct pathogenic pathways in CM. Keywords: disease state analysis

DESIGN
C57BL/6 and CBA/CaH mice were infected with 10e5 Plasmodium berghei ANKA-infected RBCs and monitored for ECM development. At onset of ECM symptoms, infected mice and naive controls were culled, perfused (in order to remove non-adherent circulating cells), and brains were removed. Total RNA was extracted from these brains and pooled (n=6 mice/ group). Pooled RNA samples were converted to cDNA and antisense cRNA, labelled and hybridized to GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Arrays (Affymetrix, Surrey Hills, Australia). Arrays were scanned using the GeneChip Scanner 3000 (Affymetrix) and GeneChip Operating Software v1.1.1 (Affymetrix). Normalisation and initial analyses were carried out in GeneSpring v7 (Agilent Technologies). Values below 0.01 were set to 0.01. Each measurement was divided by the 50th percentile of all measurements in that sample. The data was filtered for genes flagged as present, which had at least an expression level of 50. Following this, a threshold of 2.5 fold up-regulation or down-regulation of genes differentially expressed during ECM was set.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
18474652

