TITLE
DNA copy number detection from exome sequencing - Exploiting the off-targets  (Nimblegen)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Current methods for detection of copy number aberrations (CNA) from whole-exome sequencing (WES) data are based on the read counts of the captured exons only. However, accurate CNA determination is complicated by the non-uniform read depth and uneven distribution of exons. Therefore, we developed ENCODER (ENhanced COpy number Detection from Exome Reads), which eludes these problems. By exploiting the ‘off-target’ sequence reads, it allows for creation of robust copy number profiles from WES. The accuracy of ENCODER compares to approaches specifically designed for copy number detection, and outperforms current exon-based WES methods, particularly in samples of low quality.  Current methods for detection of copy number aberrations (CNA) from whole-exome sequencing (WES) data are based on the read counts of the captured exons only. However, accurate CNA determination is complicated by the non-uniform read depth and uneven distribution of exons. Therefore, we developed ENCODER (ENhanced COpy number Detection from Exome Reads), which eludes these problems. By exploiting the ‘off-target’ sequence reads, it allows for creation of robust copy number profiles from WES. The accuracy of ENCODER compares to approaches specifically designed for copy number detection, and outperforms current exon-based WES methods, particularly in samples of low quality.  Current methods for detection of copy number aberrations (CNA) from whole-exome sequencing (WES) data are based on the read counts of the captured exons only. However, accurate CNA determination is complicated by the non-uniform read depth and uneven distribution of exons. Therefore, we developed ENCODER (ENhanced COpy number Detection from Exome Reads), which eludes these problems. By exploiting the ‘off-target’ sequence reads, it allows for creation of robust copy number profiles from WES. The accuracy of ENCODER compares to approaches specifically designed for copy number detection, and outperforms current exon-based WES methods, particularly in samples of low quality. DNA copy number profiles generated with a new tool, ENCODER, were compared to DNA copy number profiles from SNP6, NimbleGen and low-coverage Whole Genome Sequencing.

DESIGN
DNA copy number profiles of mouse squamous cell lung cancer (SCLC) were generated with ENCODER from whole exome sequencing data and compared to results from  the NimbleGen array

PLATFORM
GPL13924 Nimblegen 12-plex 135K full genome mouse custom NKI array [091016_MM9_RK_CGH_HX12]

CITATIONS
25887352

