TITLE
Human oocytes reprogram adult somatic cells to pluripotent stem cells [Illumina]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The stem cell lines were generated according to the principle described in Noggle et al., Nature 2011, Oct 5;478(7367):70-5. doi: 10.1038/nature10397.  Title: Human oocytes reprogram somatic cells to a pluripotent state.  Abstract: The exchange of the oocyte's genome with the genome of a somatic cell, followed by the derivation of pluripotent stem cells, could enable the generation of specific cells affected in degenerative human diseases. Such cells, carrying the patient's genome, might be useful for cell replacement. Here we report that the development of human oocytes after genome exchange arrests at late cleavage stages in association with transcriptional abnormalities. In contrast, if the oocyte genome is not removed and the somatic cell genome is merely added, the resultant triploid cells develop to the blastocyst stage. Stem cell lines derived from these blastocysts differentiate into cell types of all three germ layers, and a pluripotent gene expression program is established on the genome derived from the somatic cell. This result demonstrates the feasibility of reprogramming human cells using oocytes and identifies removal of the oocyte genome as the primary cause of developmental failure after genome exchange. The major difference to Noggle et al. are that these new stem cell lines are tetraploid rather than diploid. The main technical difference is the addition of cytochalasinB during artificial activation, preventing extrusion of the second polar body, thereby resulting in the retention of a diploid oocyte genome, rather than a haploid one.

DESIGN
Adult somatic cells were transferred into non-enucleated oocytes and then activated in the presence of cytochalasinB. Addition of cytochalasinB inhibits extrusion of the second polar body, resulting in tetraploid eggs. The efficiency of development to the blastoycst stage is described in: Yamada et al., 2014, Human oocytes reprogram adult somatic nuclei of a type 1 diabetic to diploid pluripotent stem cells, Nature. 2014 Jun 26;510(7506):533-6. doi: 10.1038/nature13287. Blastocysts developing from these were used for the derivation or pluripotent stem cell lines. Gene expression analysis was performed to demonstrate transcriptional reprogramming. These cell lines contain both somatic and oocyte genomes.

PLATFORM
GPL14951 Illumina HumanHT-12 WG-DASL V4.0 R2 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
24776804

