TITLE
Small non-coding RNA profiling and the role of piRNA pathway genes in the protection of chicken primordial germ cells

ORGANISM
Gallus gallus

SUMMARY
Background: Genes, RNAs, and proteins play important roles during germline development. However, the functions of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) on germline development remain unclear in avian species. Recent high-throughput techniques have identified several classes of ncRNAs, including micro RNAs (miRNAs), small-interfering RNAs (siRNAs), and PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs). These ncRNAs are functionally important in the genome, however, the identification and annotation of ncRNAs in a genome is challenging. The aim of this study was to identify different types of small ncRNAs particularly piRNAs, and the role of piRNA pathway genes in the protection of chicken primordial germ cells (PGCs). Results: At first, we performed next-generation sequencing to identify ncRNAs in chicken PGCs, and we performed ab initio predictive analysis to identify putative piRNAs in PGCs. Then, we examined the expression of three repetitive sequence-linked piRNAs and 14 genic-transcript-linked piRNAs along with their linked genes using real-time PCR. All piRNAs and their linked genes were highly expressed in PGCs. Subsequently, we knocked down two known piRNA pathway genes of chicken, PIWI-like protein 1 (CIWI) and 2 (CILI), in PGCs using siRNAs. After knockdown of CIWI and CILI, we examined their effects on the expression of six putative piRNA-linked genes and DNA double-strand breakage in PGCs. The knockdown of CIWI and CILI upregulated chicken repetitive 1 (CR1) element and RAP2B, a member of RAS oncogene family, and increased DNA double-strand breakage in PGCs. Conclusions: Our results increase the understanding of PGC-expressed ncRNAs and the role of piRNA pathway genes in the protection of germ cells.

DESIGN
Small ncRNA expression profiling in SSEA-1 positive PGCs, SSEA-1 negative gonadal stromal cells (GSCs), Stage X blastoderms, and chicken embryonic fibroblast (CEFs)

PLATFORM
GPL16133 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Gallus gallus)

CITATIONS
25185950

