TITLE
Methylation Affects Transposition and Splicing of a Large CACTA Transposable Element From a MYB Transcription Factor Regulating Anthocyanin Synthase (ANS) Genes in Soybean Seed Coats (RNA-Seq)

ORGANISM
Glycine max

SUMMARY
We determined the molecular basis of three soybean lines that vary in seed coat color at the R locus which is thought to encode a MYB transcription factor.  RM55-rm is homozygous for a mutable allele (rm) that specifies black and brown striped seeds; RM30-R* is a stable black revertant isoline derived from the mutable line; and RM38-r has brown seed coats due to a recessive r allele shown to translate a truncated MYB protein. Using long range PCR, 454 sequencing of amplicons, and whole genome re-sequencing, we determined that the variegated  RM55-rm line had a 13 kb CACTA subfamily transposon insertion (designated TgmR*) at a position 110 bp from the beginning of Intron2 of the R locus, Glyma09g36983. Although the MYB encoded by R was expressed at only very low levels in older seed coats of the black revertant RM30-R* line, it upregulated expression of anthocyanidin synthase genes (ANS2, ANS3) to promote the synthesis of anthocyanins. Surprisingly, the RM30-R* revertant also carried the 13 kb TgmR* insertion in Intron2. Using RNA-Seq, we showed that intron splicing was accurate, albeit at lower levels, despite the presence of the 13kb TgmR* element. As determined by whole genome methylation sequencing, we demonstrate that the TgmR* sequence was relatively more methylated in RM30-R* than in the mutable RM55-rm progenitor line. The stabilized and more methylated RM30-R* revertant line apparently lacks effective binding of a transposae to its subterminal repeats, thus allowing intron splicing to proceed resulting in sufficient MYB protein to stimulate anthocyanin production and thus black seed coats. In this regard, the TgmR* element in soybean resembles McClintock’s Spm-suppressible and change-of-state alleles of maize. This comparison explains the opposite effects of the TgmR* element on intron splicing of the MYB gene in which it resides depending on the methylation state of the element.

DESIGN
Differential RNA expression of anthocyanin pathway genes in the seed coats of two seed color lines: RM30-R* (black) and RM38-r (brown). The multiple gene expression analysis  was performed at five different stages of seed development which were chosen based on the fresh weight (fwt) of entire seeds: 100-200, 200-300, 300-400 and 400-500 mg with green cotyledons, and a later stage in which seed desiccation had initiated judging by the yellowing of cotyledons and a lower fresh weight of 300-400 mg

PLATFORM
GPL15008 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Glycine max)

CITATIONS
25369033

