TITLE
Murine host cell response to Aeromonas infection

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Aims: To assess the virulence of multiple Aeromonas spp. using two models, a neonatal mouse assay and a mouse intestinal cell culture. Methods and Results:  Transcriptional responses to both infection models were evaluated using microarrays.  After artificial infection with a variety of Aeromonas spp., mRNA extracts from the two models were processed and hydridized to murine microarrays to determine host gene response.  Definition of virulence was determined based on host mRNA production in murine neonatal intestinal tissue and mortality of infected animals.  Infections of mouse intestinal cell cultures were then performed to determine whether this simpler model system's mRNA responses correlated to neonatal results and therefore be predictive of virulence of Aeromonas spp.  Virulent aeromonads up-regulated transcripts in both models including multiple host defense gene products (chemokines, regulation of transcription and apoptosis, cell signaling).  Avirulent species exhibited little or no host response in neonates.  Mortality results correlated well with both bacterial dose and average fold change of up-regulated transcripts in the neonatal mice. Conclusions:  Cell culture results were less discriminating but showed promise as potentially being able to be predictive of virulence.  Jun oncogene up-regulation in murine cell culture is potentially predictive of Aeromonas virulence. Significance and Impact of the Study: Having the ability to determine virulence of waterborne pathogens quickly would potentially assist public health officials to rapidly assess exposure risks. Keywords: Aeromonas; Virulence; Gene expression; Host response

DESIGN
Two infection models were assessed, live, whole animals (neonatal Swiss Webster mice) and a murine small intestinal cell culture. Biological replicates (n=5) were infected with different Aeromonas species/strains and compared to uninfected controls.

PLATFORM
GPL339 [MOE430A] Affymetrix Mouse Expression 430A Array GPL340 [MOE430B] Affymetrix Mouse Expression 430B Array GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
17897183

