TITLE
Inflammatory and immune responses in lymph nodes of Iberian red deer infected with Mycobacterium bovis.

ORGANISM
Cervus elaphus hispanicus

SUMMARY
Bovine tuberculosis (bTB), caused by Mycobacterium bovis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex), is a zoonotic disease that affects cattle and wildlife worldwide. In some regions of Spain, Iberian red deer (Cervus elaphus hispanicus) can serve as reservoir of infection, thus increasing the risk of human and cattle exposure and infection. Mesenteric lymph nodes are naturally infected with M. bovis in Iberian red deer, in which the digestive route of infection is particularly important in Mediterranean Spain. In this study we characterized the differential expression of inflammatory and immune response genes in mesenteric lymph nodes of Iberian red deer naturally infected with M. bovis using a Ruminant Immuno-inflammatory Gene Universal Array (RIGUA) and real-time RT-PCR. Of the 600 genes that were analyzed in the microarray, 157 showed ≥ 1.2 fold changes in expression in infected or uninfected deer and 17 genes displayed an expression fold change greater than 1.7 with a P-value ≤ 0.05 and were selected for further analysis. These genes included tight junction proteins (Z02 and occluding), IL-11R, bactenecin, CD62L, CD74, desmoglein, IgA and IgM that constitute new findings and suggest new mechanisms by which M. bovis may modulate host inflammatory and immune responses. Identification of genes differentially expressed in animals and tissues naturally infected with M. bovis contributes to our basic understanding of the mechanisms of pathogenesis and protective immunity to mycobacterial infections and may have important implications for future functional genomic and vaccine studies to aid in the control of bTB in deer and other wildlife reservoir species. Keywords: disease state analysis

DESIGN
Mesenteric lymph node RNA from four different uninfected Iberian red deer stags and two Iberian red deer stags infected with Mycobacterium bovis.  Infected animals were naturally infected with M. bovis.  All animals were hunter-harvested and the tissues retrieved 2-6 hrs after animal hunting.

PLATFORM
GPL4456 OSU RIGUA (Ruminant Immuno-inflammatory Gene Universal Array) 4K

CITATIONS
17604102

