TITLE
Increased Human like Alzheimer features in a Novel Mouse Model with Oxidative DNA Repair Dysfunction

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The decline of cognitive function is a feature of normal human aging and is exacerbated in Alzheimer’s disease (AD).  DNA repair declines in brain cells during normal aging and even more so in AD.   Here we show that experimental reduction in levels of the base excision repair enzyme, DNA polymerase β (Polb) renders neurons vulnerable to age-related dysfunction and degeneration in a mouse model of AD.    Whereas 3xTgAD mice exhibit age-related extracellular amyloid b-peptide (Ab) accumulation and cognitive deficits, but no neuronal death, 3xTg/Polb+/- mice accumulates intracellular Ab and neurons die in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex.  The DNA repair-deficient 3xTgAD mice exhibited increased DNA strand breaks and apoptotic caspase activation with loss of hippocampal volume, and impaired synaptic plasticity and memory retention.  Molecular profiling revealed remarkable similarities in gene expression alterations in brain cells of AD patients and 3xTgAD/Polb+/- mice including multiple abnormalities suggestive of impaired cellular bioenergetics.  Our findings demonstrate that a modest decrement in oxidative DNA damage processing is sufficient to render neurons vulnerable to AD-related pathogenic molecular and cellular alterations that result in the dysfunction and death of neurons, and associated cognitive deficits.

DESIGN
4 mouse strains were used in these experiments,  the 3xTgAD and Pol β (+/-) mice were bred at the National Institute on Aging (Baltimore, Maryland). The original line 3xTgAD line was generated as described previously (Oddo, et. al 2003) and possess APPswe, PS1M146V, and tauP301L mutations. DNA polymerase beta heterozygous mice, Pol β (+/-), were crossed with the 3xTgAD mice to generate a 3xTgAD/Pol β (+/-) mouse. The Wt strain is C57Bl/6. At 20 months of age these mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation, the brain removed from the skull and dissected into regions of interest, the prefrontal cortex was used for the microarray studies.

