TITLE
IFN-gamma alters the response of Borrelia burgdorferi-activated endothelium to favor chronic inflammation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Borrelia burgdorferi, the agent of Lyme disease, promotes pro-inflammatory changes in endothelium that lead to the recruitment of leukocytes. The host immune response to infection results in increased levels of IFN-gamma in the serum and lesions of Lyme disease patients that correlate with greater severity of disease. Therefore, the effect of IFN-gamma on the gene expression profile of primary human endothelial cells exposed to B. burgdorferi was determined. B. burgdorferi and IFN-gamma synergistically augmented the expression of 34 genes, seven of which encode chemokines. Six of these (CCL7, CCL8, CX3CL1, CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11) attract T lymphocytes, and one (CXCL2) is specific for neutrophils. Synergistic production of the attractants for T cells was confirmed at the protein level. IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, and LPS also cooperated with IFN-gamma to induce synergistic production of CXCL10 by endothelium, indicating that IFN-gamma potentiates inflammation in concert with a variety of mediators. An in vitro model of the blood vessel wall revealed that an increased number of human T lymphocytes traversed endothelium exposed to B. burgdorferi and IFN-gamma, as compared to unstimulated endothelial monolayers. In contrast, addition of IFN-gamma diminished the migration of neutrophils across B. burgdorferi-activated endothelium. IFN-gamma thus alters gene expression by endothelium exposed to B. burgdorferi in a manner that promotes recruitment of T cells and suppresses that of neutrophils. This modulation may facilitate the development of chronic inflammatory lesions in Lyme disease. Keywords: Cell response to inflammatory stimuli

DESIGN
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were stimulated with Interferon-gamma (IFN-g), Borrelia burgdorferi or both IFN-g and Borrelia or were left unstimulated.  Affymetrix HGU133 plus 2.0 slides were used in duplicate for each condition.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
17202382

