TITLE
TRANSCRIPTOME MODIFICATIONS IN HUMAN GINGIVAL FIBROBLASTS EXPOSED TO 2-HYDROXYETHYL-METHACRYLATE (HEMA)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Objective: 2-Hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA), one of the most common components of tooth filling materials, could diffuse throughout dentine, and in gingival and pulp cells, affecting odontoblast vitality. Design: the aim of this study was to assess the differential transcriptome modulation induced by HEMA treatment in human cultured gingival fibroblasts (HGFs) at different exposure time compared to untreated cells. Materials and methods: Gene expression profile was performed by employing a whole gene microarray approach on RNA extracted from cultured HGFs exposed to 3 mmol/l HEMA for 24 or 96 h. Differentially identified transcripts were analyzed by Ingenuity Pathways Analysis software to disclose genes biological functions. Results: Hierarchical clustering analysis of the data set originated from a total of 8 experiments showed the selective presence of two gene clusters, composed by hundreds trandcripts differentially expressed after 24-h and 96-h HEMA treatment. when compared to untreated controls. Functional analysis showed the transcripts involvement mainly in cell survival, proliferation and death, with an unbalance towards cell growth and inflammatory response. Conclusions: Data analysis showed an overall damage induced by HEMA exposure for both HGFs cultures at 24 and 96-h mainly leading to a proliferation impairement. Interestingly 24-h HEMA exposure could induce the cells to trigger repair mechanisms evidencing an early compensatory response and survive while. 96-h incubation might increase apoptosis as a consequence of the chronic damage.

DESIGN
Gene expression profile of Human Gingival Fibroblasts (HGFs) exposed to 3mM 2-Hydroxyethyl Methacrylate (HEMA) for 24- and 96-h versus untreated Human Gingival Fibroblasts at 24- and 96-h. A total of 8 experiments was carried out including biological and technical replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL6254 Phalanx Human OneArray GPL13693 Phalanx Human OneArray® v5

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

