TITLE
TRIM24 suppresses development of spontaneous hepatic lipid accumulation and hepatocellular carcinoma in mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Purpose: berrantly high expression of TRIM24 occurs in human cancers, including hepatocellular carcinoma. In contrast, TRIM24 in the mouse is reportedly a liver-specific tumor suppressor. To address this dichotomy and uncover direct regulatory functions of TRIM24 in vivo, we developed a new mouse model that lacks expression of all Trim24 isoforms, as the previous model expresses normal levels of Trim24 lacking only exon 4. Methods: To produce germline-deleted Trim24dlE1 mice, deletion of the promoter and exon 1 of Trim24 was induced in Trim24LoxP mice by crossing with a zona pellucida 3-Cre line for global deletion. Liver-specific deletion (Trim24hep) was achieved by crossing with an Albumin-Cre line. Phenotypic analyses were complemented by protein, gene-specific and global RNA expression analyses and quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation. Results:Global loss of Trim24 disrupted hepatic homeostasis in 100% of mice with highly significant, decreased expression of oxidation/reduction, steroid, fatty acid and lipid metabolism genes, as well as increased expression of genes in unfolded protein, endoplasmic reticulum stress and cell cycle pathways. Trim24dlE1/dlE1 mice have markedly depleted visceral fat and, like Trim24hep/hep mice, spontaneously develop hepatic lipid-filled lesions, steatosis, hepatic injury, fibrosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Conclusions: TRIM24, an epigenetic co-regulator of transcription, directly and indirectly represses hepatic lipid accumulation, inflammation, fibrosis and damage in the murine liver. Complete loss of Trim24 offers a model of human nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, steatosis, fibrosis and development of hepatocellular carcinoma in the absence of high-fat diet or obesity.

DESIGN
mRNA profiles of 8 weeks wild type (WT) and Trim24-/- mice were generated by deep sequencing, in triplicate, using Illumina HiSeq 2000

