TITLE
Ascites enriches for ovarian cancer stem-like cells that express membrane GRP78

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Ovarian cancer patients are generally diagnosed at stage III/IV, when ascites is common. The volume of ascites positively correlates with the extent of metastasis and negatively with prognosis. Membrane GRP78, a stress-inducible endoplasmic reticulum chaperone which also appears on the plasma membrane (memGRP78) of aggressive cancers, plays a crucial role in the maintenance of embryonic stem cells. Our present study demonstrates that tumor cells isolated from ascites generated by epithelial ovarian cancer (ID8 cells) bearing mice have increased memGRP78 expression compared to ID8 cells in normal culture. We hypothesize that these ascites associated memGRP78+ cells are cancer stem-like cells (CSC) and memGRP78 is functionally important in CSCs. Supporting this hypothesis, we show that memGRP78+ cells isolated from ascites have increased sphere forming and tumor initiating abilities compared to memGRP78- cells. When the tumor microenvironment is recapitulated by adding ascites fluid to cell culture, ID8 cells express more memGRP78 and increased self-renewing ability compared to those cultured in medium alone. Moreover, compared to their counterparts cultured in normal medium, ID8 cells cultured in ascites, or isolated from ascites, show an increased expression of stem cell markers Sca-1, Snail and SOX9. Importantly, antibodies directed against the carboxy (COOH)-terminal domain of GRP78 significantly reduce the self-renewing ability of murine and human ovarian cancer cells pre-incubated with ascites, associated with a decreased phosphorylation of Akt and GSK3α, and reduced level of the transcriptional factor Snail. Based on this data, we suggest that memGRP78 is a logical therapeutic target for late stage ovarian cancer.

DESIGN
ID8 cells, murine epithelial ovarian cancer cells, were either cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS  (id8) or 10% ascites developed by ID8 cells bearing mice for 7 days (ASid8).

