TITLE
Sharpin controls differentiation and cytokine production of mesenchymal bone marrow cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The cytosolic protein Sharpin is as a component of the linear ubiquitin chain assembly complex (LUBAC), which regulates NF-κB signaling in response to specific ligands. Its inactivating mutation in Cpdm (chronic proliferative dermatitis mutation) mice causes multi-organ inflammation, yet this phenotype is not transferable into wildtype mice by hematopoietic stem cell transfer. Recent evidence demonstrated that Cpdm mice additionally display low bone mass, but the cellular and molecular causes of this phenotype remained to be established. Here we have applied non-decalcified histology together with cellular and dynamic histomorphometry to perform a thorough skeletal phenotyping of Cpdm mice. We show that Cpdm mice display trabecular and cortical osteopenia, solely explained by impaired bone formation, whereas osteoclastogenesis is unaffected. We additionally found that Cpdm mice display a severe disturbance of articular cartilage integrity in the absence of joint inflammation, supporting the concept that Sharpin-deficiency affects mesenchymal cell differentiation. Consistently, Cpdm mesenchymal cells displayed reduced osteogenic capacitiy ex vivo, yet this defect was not associated with impaired NF-κB signaling. A molecular comparison of wildtype and Cpdm bone marrow cell populations further revealed that Cpdm mesenchymal cells produce higher levels of Cxcl5 and lower levels of IL1ra. Collectively, our data demonstrate that skeletal defects of Cpdm mice are not caused by chronic inflammation, but that Sharpin is as a critical regulator of mesenchymal cell differentiation and gene expression. They additionally provide an alternative molecular explanation for the inflammatory phenotype of Cpdm mice and the absence of disease transfer by hematopoetic stem cell transplantation.

DESIGN
Unsorted bone marrow cells from wildtype and Cpdm mice were cultured for 10 days in the presence of ascorbic acid and ß-glycerophosphate to induce osteogenic differentiation

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
26363054

