TITLE
Transcript Expression Changes over Time-from-injury in Anterior Cruciate Ligament Tears: Implications for Reconstruction and Repair

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is an essential stabilizer of the tibiofemoral articulation. ACL tears often lead to functional instability and are associated with an increased risk for osteoarthritis. The healing potential of the injured ACL is poorly understood and is considered to be limited. Transcriptome-wide expression profiles of 24 human ACL remnants recovered at the time of surgical reconstruction were analyzed utilizing the Agilent human 8x60K microarray platform. Gene ontology was performed on differentially expressed transcripts based on time-from-injury (acute, < 3 months; intermediate, 3-12 months; chronic, > 12 months). A subset of transcripts was validated via microfluidic digital polymerase-chain-reaction. Expression of periostin, a highly differentially expressed transcript, was tested by immunohistochemistry. Numerous transcripts covering important functional classifications were differentially expressed by time-from-injury. In acute tears, processes representing angiogenesis were repressed while those representing stem-cell differentiation were elevated. In intermediate tears, processes representing stem-cell proliferation concomitant with cellular component organization/cellular localization were elevated. In chronic tears, processes denoting myosin filament organization were elevated while those representing cellular component organization/cell localization and extracellular matrix organization were repressed. Expression levels of periostin were down-regulated in chronic tears compared to acute (42-fold) and intermediate (29-fold) tears. Immunohistochemistry confirmed a decline in periostin expression in tissues from chronic tears. These findings suggest an initial attempt of the injured ACL to repair, which declines with time-from-injury. These findings have implications for efforts to repair the ACL and may be relevant for reconstruction of the ACL. The functional role of periostin in ACL injuries, and the potential implication for surgical treatment, warrants further investigation.

DESIGN
Total RNA obtained frominjured anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tissues from pateints undergoing ACL surgery.

PLATFORM
GPL17077 Agilent-039494 SurePrint G3 Human GE v2 8x60K Microarray 039381 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
27159315

