TITLE
A functional portrait of Med7 and the Mediator complex in Candida albicans [expression]

ORGANISM
Candida albicans

SUMMARY
In this study, we have investigated Mediator function in the human fungal pathogen C. albicans. An initial screening of conditionally regulated Mediator subunits showed that the Med7 of C. albicans was not essential, in contrast to the situation noted for Saccharomyces cerevisiae. While loss of CaMed7 did not lead to loss of viability under normal growth conditions, it dramatically influenced the pathogen’s ability to grow in different carbon sources, to form hyphae and biofilms, and to colonize the gastrointestinal tracts of mice. We used location profiling to determine Mediator binding under yeast and hyphal morphologies characterized by different transcription profiles. We observed a core set of specific and common genes bound by Med7 under both conditions; this specific core set is expanded considerably during hyphal growth, supporting the idea that Mediator binding correlates with changes in transcriptional activity and that this binding is condition specific. Med7 bound not only in the promoter regions of active genes but also of inactive genes and within coding regions and at the 3’ ends of genes. By combining genome-wide location profiling, expression analyses and phenotyping, we have identified different Med7 regulons including genes related to glycolysis and the Filamentous Growth Regulator family.

DESIGN
We performed a transcription profile with an med7 Grace strain under yeast and hyphae conditions (YPD +/- tet, 30oC and YPD +10% serum +/- tet, 37oC, respectively). We used the Med7 tetracycline-repressible mutant to determine the transcriptional consequence of Med7 depletion by tetracycline; we measured the transcriptional differences between Med7 cells growing in YPD at 30°C in the presence and absence of tetracycline using whole-genome microarrays. Using a statistical-significance analysis with an estimated false-discovery rate of 5%, in addition to a cutoff of 1.5-fold, we identified 140 genes that require Med7p for their proper expression; 56 genes were up-regulated and 84 were down-regulated. Because of the wrinkled colony morphology and the evidence for changes in the expression of gene sets implicated in the hyphal transition, we also investigated the impact of the tet-repressed allele of MED7 on gene expression under hyphal growth conditions. We performed a Med7 conditional mutant expression profiling under the hyphal-inducing conditions of 37°C in the presence of 10% serum. Using a statistical-significance analysis with an estimated false-discovery rate of 5%, in addition to a cutoff of 1.5-fold, we identified 521 genes that require Med7p for their proper expression, including 261 up-regulated genes and 260 down-regulated genes.

