TITLE
The glucosinolate metabolite 1-methoxy-3-indolylmethyl alcohol induces a gene expression profile in mouse liver similar to the expression signature caused by known genotoxic hepatocarcinogens

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Breakdown products of some glucosinolates – defense chemicals of Brassicales – induce detoxifying enzymes and demonstrate preventive activities against chemically induced tumorigenesis in animal models. However, other breakdown products are genotoxic. 1-Methoxy-3-indolylmethyl alcohol (1-MIM-OH) is mutagenic in bacterial and mammalian cells upon activation by sulphotransferases and forms DNA adducts in mouse tissues. This effect was enhanced in mice transgenic for human sulphotransferases 1A1/2 (FVB/N-hSULT1A1/2). In this study we explored gene expression changes induced by 1-MIM-OH in mouse liver.  FVB/N-hSULT1A1/2 mice were orally treated with 1-MIM-OH for 21 or 90 days, leading to high levels of hepatic 1-MIM-DNA adducts. Genome-wide expression analyzes in this tissue demonstrated no influence on detoxifying enzymes, but up-regulation of many mediators of the tumour suppressor p53 and down-regulation of Fhit and other long genes.  In conclusion, 1-MIM-OH did not induce protective enzymes, but formed high levels of DNA adducts, which were recognized by affected cells as reflected by p53 activation. While this p53 response might aim to protection, it was unable to prevent the accumulation of DNA adducts. However, various epdemiological studies reported inverse associations between the intake of cruciferous vegetables and cancer. This association might be due to the presence of other glucosinolates with tumour-preventing influences possibly outweighing adverse effects of some metabolites.    Nevertheless, 1-MIM-OH is a genotoxic substance inducing a gene expression profile similar to the expression signature caused by known genotoxic hepatocarcinogens.

DESIGN
Male FVB/N-SULT1A1/2 mice were orally treated with 1-MIM-OH, trice per week, 26 mg/kg body mass per treatment. Control animals only received the vehicle (glyceryl trioctanoate) over the same period. Animals were killed after 10 and 40 treatments (over a period of 21 and 90 d, respectively), always 24 h after the last treatment (6 treated and 6 control mice, respectively). Organs were weighed, shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored for a few days at -80°C until further processing. Liver organs were ground in a Tissuelyser ball mill (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) under cooling with liquid nitrogen. The frozen liver tissue was crushed and total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For genome-wide microarray analysis quality of RNA was controlled using the BioAnalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Affymetrix GeneChip hybridization (GeneChip MouseGenome 430 2.0) was performed with 1 µg total RNA according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. RNA from six individual animals per group (21-day and 90-day treatments with 1-MIM-OH or the vehicle only) was analyzed. For the analysis one hybridized GeneChip (mouse 6 [treated for 21 days with 1-MIM-OH]) was excluded due to hybridization artefacts.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
25559983

