TITLE
Nutritional control of plant development: molecular analysis of the NO3- response pathway in Arabidopsis roots.

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Background: The Arabidopsis ANR1 gene is a key regulator of root architecture (Zhang and Forde, 1998): when ANR1 is down-regulated (by antisense or co-suppression) the resulting lines are no longer able to proliferate their lateral roots in response to localised supplies of NO3- (Zhang and Forde, 1998). ANR1 encodes a root-specific member of the MADS box family of transcription factors and is thought to be a component of a signalling pathway that links an external NO3- signal to increased meristematic activity in the lateral root meristem (Zhang et al., 1999).A major goal of our present BBSRC-funded project is to learn more about this NO3- response pathway by identifying the downstream targets of ANR1. To this end we have generated a set of transgenic lines in which ANR1 is under a novel post-translational control. This was achieved by tagging ANR1 with the steroid-binding domain of the rat glucocorticoid receptor (rGR) and expressing the fusion protein under the control of the CaMV 35S promoter. Initial results with these lines confirm that the architecture of the root system is altered in a way that correlates with the presence of the steroid inducer (dexamethasone, or DEX) and the expression of the ANR1::rGR transgene.  We now wish to apply transcript analysis to one of these lines (ANGR4-12) to identify the genes whose expression is up- or down-regulated by ANR1. Sablowski and Meyerowitz (1998) successfully used an analogous approach to identify a gene that is an immediate target of the AP3 MADS-box transcription factor (although here, in the absence of microarray technology, differential display was used). Experimental: Plants of the two genotypes (ANGR4-12 and wild type) will be grown in sterile liquid culture for 3-4 weeks and then starved of N for 3 d (to quench the endogenous NO3- signalling pathway) before starting the DEX treatment. Roots will be harvested after 60 min from roots of DEX-treated and mock-treated RGR4-12 and control plants (four RNA samples). To minimise background noise due to environmental variables we will repeat the experiment three times and pool the RNA samples. Keywords: strain_or_line_design

DESIGN
Number of plants pooled:20 Biological replicates: 2

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

