TITLE
Profile expression of genes involved in plant reaction to lead: uptake tolerance and defense.

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
The aim of the experiment is to study the pattern of genes expression involved in defense to heavy metals and their transport and distribution within plant organs. Most of the plant species inhibits heavy metals entrance to the roots and their transport and accumulation to/in above ground organs after toxic ions penetrate roots. Some species of Brassicacea differ in the pattern of defense gene expression in the roots in a way that allow for greater transport of toxic ions to the above ground part. If so, by harvesting such plants toxic elements will be extracted from the soil.  Identification of these differences in the gene expression is crucial in development of the newly emerging environmental biotechnology phytoremediation in which plants as well as being green lungs play also a role of a green liver. Results of our studies with mustard plants showed among others that exposure for 12 hr to 12.5mg of Pb/1L of hydroponics solution is efficient to increase of constitutive genes expression and in de novo induction of genes expression coding for Pb tolerance and that this response is organ specific. Sequencing of the whole genome of A. thaliana opens the opportunity to study this phenomenon at molecular level more widely including the signaling (two-component system) and plasmolemma and tonoplast transporters genes. Therefore in our further steps we are going to use Arabidopsis as a model plant and the transcriptomics aproach is the only way for such studies. At first based on results with mustard physiological study we will conduct for elucidating Arabidopsis plant responses to lead in order to choose the most appropriate dose and time of treatment. In the trascriptome experiment we would like to study the profile gene expression in above ground parts and in the roots of arabidopsis plants in response to toxic ions of lead. Results of this study, besides promising applicable aspects, will also lead to a better understanding of plant acclimation and adaptation to antropogenic stresses. We expect to obtain mutant(s) tolerant to Pb and if so, they will be provided to NASC. Keywords: organism_part_comparison_design

DESIGN
6 samples

PLATFORM
GPL71 [AG] Affymetrix Arabidopsis Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

