TITLE
Choline transporter-like1 is required for plasmodesmal targeting of Potato leafroll virus movement protein MP17 and long-distance assimilate transport

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Macromolecular trafficking and cell-to-cell communication in plants occurs via plasmodesmata (PD). Currently, little is known about the proteins defining these sophisticated cell-to-cell contacts. To uncover proteins required for PD structure and function we made use of the 17 kDa movement protein (MP17) of the Potato leafroll virus (PLRV). The protein is required for cell-to-cell movement of the virus and localizes specifically to branched PD in source tissues. By forward genetic screening for Arabidopsis mutants with altered PD binding of MP17, several mutants were found. Map-based cloning of one of these mutants revealed a mutation in the choline transporter-like 1 (CHER1) protein. The mutation abolished plasma membrane localization of the protein. As consequence phosphatidylcholine levels and PD binding of MP17 decreased. Transcriptome analysis revealed a down-regulation of defense genes and genes involved in the synthesis of very long chain fatty acids, indicating an impairment of lipid signaling. Furthermore, cher1 mutants showed a reduced assimilate export and stunted growth. These findings highlight the emerging role of phospholipids, especially in the context of PD structure and function as well as potential binding sites for plasma membrane- and PD-associated proteins, which has been neglected for a long time.

DESIGN
light exposed source leaves from wild type Col-0, T-DNA insertion line cher1-4 and mutant cher1-5 (10 weeks old). Samples: per pool  2 source leaves from 4 different plants, taken in the afternoon; wildtype (WT): Col-0, cher1-4: T-DNA insertion line SALK-065853 (ecotype Col-0, kanamycin resistance), cher1-5: Col-0 with GGA -- > GAA at position 740 of cds

PLATFORM
GPL12621 Agilent-021169 Arabidopsis 4 Oligo Microarray (V4) (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

