TITLE
KAP1 promotes proliferation and metastatic progression of breast cancer cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
KAP1 (TRIM28) is a transcriptional regulator in embryonic development that controls stem cell self-renewal, chromatin organization and the DNA damage response, acting as an essential co-repressor for KRAB family zinc finger proteins (KRAB-ZNF). To gain insight into the function of this large gene family, we developed an antibody that recognizes the conserved zinc fingers linker region (ZnFL) in multiple KRAB-ZNF. Here we report that the expression of many KRAB-ZNF along with active SUMOlyated KAP1 is elevated widely in human breast cancers. KAP1 silencing in breast cancer cells reduced proliferation and inhibited the growth and metastasis of tumor xenografts. Conversely, KAP1 overexpression stimulated cell proliferation and tumor growth. In cells where KAP1 was silenced, we identified multiple downregulated genes linked to tumor progression and metastasis, including EREG/epiregulin, PTGS2/COX2, MMP1, MMP2 and CD44, along with downregulation of multiple KRAB-ZNF proteins. KAP1-dependent stabilization of KRAB-ZNF required direct interactions with KAP1. Together, our results show that KAP1-mediated stimulation of multiple KRAB-ZNF contributes to the growth and metastasis of breast cancer.

DESIGN
To determine KAP1 regulated genes, we performed microarray analysis of gene expression in KAP1 depleted breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231LN. 7 total samples were analyzed. Stable sublines of MDA-MB-231LN cells expressing control non-targeting shRNA (Scr, 3 biological replicates) and two different shRNAs against KAP1 (KAP1-3, 2 biological replicates and KAP1-4, 2 biological replicates) from doxycycline-inducible pTRIPZ vector were cultured in the presence of 0.5 ug/ml doxycycline for 7 days to induce shRNA expression. Cells were lysed and total RNA was isolated using mirVana miRNA isolation kit (Ambion) in the WVU Genomics Core Facility.

PLATFORM
GPL9793 Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0 ST Array [CDF: HuEx-1_0-st-v2,coreR3,A20071112,EP]

CITATIONS
25421577

