TITLE
Comparison of the transcript profile of the auxin resistant axr4 mutant and wild-type Col0

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
The plant hormone auxin represents an important regulator of growth and development. Significant insight into the mechanisms of auxin action have been obtained from studies of auxin resistant mutants such as aux1 and axr3. The Arabidopsis axr4 mutant was identified in a screen for auxin resistant root growth. In addition to the root growth of axr4 being resistant to exogenous auxin, there is also a 50% reduction in the number of lateral roots that form. The double axr4/aux1 mutant shows an additive effect in reducing lateral root numbers to 10% of wild-type. Gaining further information about the potential interaction between AUX1 and AXR4 may provide important insight into auxin regulated plant growth. Mapping experiments have placed the AXR4 gene on the lower arm of chromosome 1 between the ch1 and le markers (Hobbie and Estelle 1995). However, the AXR4 gene remains to be cloned. Identifying the AXR4 gene will help in elucidating the function of the protein. A transcript analysis of axr4 mutant seedlings will be used in 2 ways. Firstly, the transcription level of genes in the locality of the axr4 map position will be examined to identify those which are absent or significantly reduced in axr4 compared to the Col0 control. If the lesion causing the axr4 mutation results in a highly unstable mRNA or abolishes transcription then the signal will be dramatically reduced. Potential candidate genes identified in this way will be further analysed using a combination of RT-PCR and sequencing to identify the AXR4 gene.  Secondly, the transcriptomics data obtained from axr4 and Col0 will be compared to identify genes which show significant transcript level differences and therefore represent targets for either direct or indirect regulation by AXR4.  Hobbie, L. and Estelle, M. (1995) The axr4 auxin-resistant mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana define a gene important for root gravitropism and lateral root initiation. Plant J. 7 211-220 Keywords: strain_or_line_design

