TITLE
RNA-sequencing of the GSI treatment of the CUTLL1 cell line

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Genetic studies in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia have uncovered a remarkable complexity of oncogenic and loss-of-function mutations. Amongst this plethora of genetic changes, NOTCH1 activating mutations stand out as the most frequently occurring genetic defect, identified in more than 50% of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias, supporting an essential driver role for this gene in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia oncogenesis. In this study, we aimed to establish a comprehensive compendium of the long non-coding RNA transcriptome under control of Notch signaling. For this purpose, we measured the transcriptional response of all protein coding genes and long non-coding RNAs upon pharmacological Notch inhibition in the human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell line CUTLL1 using RNA-sequencing. Similar Notch dependent profiles were established for normal human CD34+ thymic T-cell progenitors exposed to Notch signaling activity in vivo. In addition, we generated long non-coding RNA expression profiles (array data) from GSI treated T-ALL cell lines, ex vivo isolated Notch active CD34+ and Notch inactive CD4+CD8+ thymocytes and from a primary cohort of 15 T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients with known NOTCH1 mutation status. Integration of these expression datasets with publically available Notch1 ChIP-sequencing data resulted in the identification of long non-coding RNAs directly regulated by Notch activity in normal and malignant T-cell context. Given the central role of Notch in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia oncogenesis, these data pave the way towards development of novel therapeutic strategies that target hyperactive Notch1 signaling in human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

DESIGN
CUTLL1 cell lines were treated with Compound E (GSI) or DMSO (solvent control). Cells were collected 12 h and 48 h after treatment. This was performed for 3 replicates. RNA-sequencing was performed on these samples.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
25344525

