TITLE
Transcriptomics Analysis and Hormonal Changes of Male and Female Rats Treated Chronically with a Low Dose of Acrylamide in their Drinking Water

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Acrylamide is known to produce follicular cell tumors of the thyroid in rats. RccHan Wistar rats were exposed in utero to a carcinogenic dose of acrylamide (3 mg/Kg bw/day) from gestation day 6 to delivery and then through their drinking water to postnatal day 35. In order to identify potential mechanisms of carcinogenesis in the thyroid glands, we used a transcriptomics approach. Thyroid glands were collected from male pups at 10 PM and female pups at 10 AM or 10 PM in order to establish whether active exposure to acrylamide influenced gene expression patterns or pathways that could be related to carcinogenesis. While all animals exposed to acrylamide showed changes in expected target pathways related to carcinogenesis, such as DNA repair, DNA replication, chromosome segregation, among others, animals that were sacrificed while actively drinking acrylamide-laced water during their active period at night showed increased changes in pathways related to oxidative stress, detoxification pathways, metabolism, and activation of checkpoint pathways, among others. In addition, thyroid hormones, T3 and T4, were increased in acrylamide-treated rats sampled at night, but not in quiescent animals, compared to controls. The data clearly indicate that time of day for sample collection is critical to identifying molecular pathways that are altered by the exposures. These results suggest that carcinogenesis in the thyroids of acrylamide treated rats may ensue from several different mechanisms such as hormonal changes and oxidative stress and not only from direct genotoxicity, as has been assumed to date.

DESIGN
A transcriptomics approach (microarrays and bioinformatics) was used to investigate changes in gene expression and the association with physiological responses (changes in plasma hormone levels) in rats treated with acrylamide (AA) from gestational day 6 to post natal day 35. We hypothesized that 3 mg AA/Kg bw/day exposure would produce changes in plasma hormone levels associated with key genes and pathways involved with molecular actions of AA.

PLATFORM
GPL15084 Agilent-028279 SurePrint G3 Rat GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

