TITLE
B cell super-enhancers and regulatory clusters recruit AID tumorigenic activity

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens ; Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The antibody gene mutator AID promiscuously damages oncogenes and B cell identity genes leading to chromosomal translocations and tumorigenesis. Why non-immunoglobulin loci are susceptible to AID activity is unknown. Here we study AID-mediated lesions in the context of nuclear architecture and the B cell regulome. We show that AID targets are not randomly distributed across the genome, but are predominantly clustered within super-enhancers. Unexpectedly, in these domains AID deaminates highly active promoters and eRNA+ enhancers interconnected in some instances over megabases of linear chromatin. Using genome editing we demonstrate that 3D-linked targets cooperate to recruit AID-mediated breaks. Furthermore, a comparison of hypermutation in mouse B cells, AID-induced kataegis in human lymphomas, and translocations in MEFs reveals that AID damages different genes in different cell types. Yet, in all cases, the targets are predominantly associated with topological complex, highly transcribed super-enhancers, demonstrating that these compartments are key mediators of AID recruitment.

DESIGN
Examination of AID activity in human cells via Single Nucleotide Variant discovery in H3K4me3 ChIP-seq data from 26 MSH2-/-; AIDtg; UGItg, 18 AICDA-/- and 2 unmodified RAMOS clonal populations.  Examination of PolII mediated long-range interactions via Chia-PET of RAMOS cells (2 sample).  Identification of super-enhancers from H3K27Ac ChIP-Seq data from activated B cells (3 replicates and 1 input control) and RAMOS cells (1 sample and 1 input control), 2 preparations of naive and 2 of germinal center (GC) B cells from human tonsilectomy samples.  Mapping of regulatory elements in RAMOS based on H3K4me1 (1 sample) and Nipbl (2 replicates) ChIP-Seq.  RNA expression analyses of activated B cells from 3 WT and 3 Il4raU/U mice and RAMOS cells (3 replicates).  Mapping of long-range interactions by 4C in activated B cells from a WT and an Il4raU/U mouse with the IL4ra and Il21r locus, respectively, as a viewpoint.  Mapping of Super-Enhancers in activated B cells from Il4raU/U and WT control mice (2 samples).

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens) GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus) GPL16791 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Homo sapiens) GPL17021 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
25483777

