TITLE
Cells with features of totipotency derived from human ESC and iPSC by transient BMP4 exposure

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Human pluripotent stem cells (hPSC) exposed to BMP4 (B) and inhibitors of ACTIVIN signaling (A83-01; A) and FGF2 (PD173074; P) in absence of FGF2 (BAP conditions) differentiate into colonies primarily comprised of trophoblast. In an attempt to isolate trophoblast stem cells, colonies of hESC were exposed to BAP for 24 h at which time they had begun to transition into a CDX2-positive state. Cultures were then dissociated into single cells by trypsin and grown on a gelatin substratum. Under these conditions, organized CDX2+/KRT7- colonies began to emerge within a few days. The self-renewing cell lines were not TBSC, but met standard criteria for pluripotency. They were named H1BP cells. They differed from the progenitor hPSC in morphology, ability to be clonally propagated from single cells onto gelatin, requirements for FGF2, and transcriptome profile.

DESIGN
RNA was isolated from control human embryonic stem cells H1 cells, H1 cells exposed to BAP conditions for 24 and 48 h, H1BP colonies picked individually at two different passage numbers (p7 and p18), and H1BP cells that had been allowed to differentiate spontaneously in standard non-conditioned hESC medium in absence of FGF2. In order to collect RNA from cells, medium was removed and RNA STAT60  (I ml; Tel-Test, Friendswood, TX) was immediately added to culture dish and RNA extracted by following the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples of RNA were submitted to University Texas Southwestern Medical Center Microarray Core Facility ( https://microarray.swmed.edu/ ) and microarray analysis performed with Illumina HumanHT-12 v4 expression BeadChips. Raw intensity data were background subtracted by using BeadStudio software and analyzed further by GeneSpring 12.6 software (Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara CA), according to the advanced workflow protocol: percentile shift and filter by flags (detected).

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
25870291

