TITLE
Mitochondrially-imported RNA in Drug Discovery

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The import of nuclear transcribed RNAs into mitochondria is an emerging area that presents tremendous opportunity to develop human metabolic therapeutics. However, our knowledge base is quite limited. Much remains to be discovered regarding specific RNA localization and mechanisms of import. In order to identify novel RNAs imported into mitochondria, all RNAs within the mitochondria were characterized using next generation sequencing technology. Several nuclear transcribed RNAs were found within mitochondrial RNA samples, including nuclear ribosomal RNAs, gamma satellite RNA and VL30 retroelement RNA. The presence of these RNAs within mitochondria coupled with RNA sequencing data (RNAseq) from other laboratories investigating mitochondrial RNA processing, lead us to hypothesize that nuclease treatment of mitoplasts is insufficient for removing contaminating cytoplasmic RNAs. In contrast to traditional methodology, mitochondrial import was evaluated by qRT-PCR after stepwise removal of the outer mitochondrial membrane and subsequent lysis of mitochondria. This allowed identification of RNAs lost from the mitochondria with the same kinetics as mtDNA-transcribed RNAs. This approach provided an improved evaluation of nuclear RNA enrichment within mitochondrial membranes in order to characterize nuclease protection and mitochondrial import and identify false-positive detection errors. qRT-PCR results confirmed the presence of VL30 retroelement RNA within mitochondria and question the hypothesis that the RNA component of RNase P is imported. These results illustrate a reliable approach for evaluating the presence of RNAs within mitochondria and open new avenues of investigation relating to mitochondrial RNA biology and in targeting mitochondrial based therapeutics.

DESIGN
RNA isolated from purified mitoplasts was sequenced on an Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx

PLATFORM
GPL11002 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
25847616

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
