TITLE
Effect of 6 weeks of high fat diet on gene expression in human subcutaneous adipose tissue of twins

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Food composition of diets strongly determines the risk of experiencing inflammation related metabolic or cardiovascular disease. We aimed to determine the extent of inheritance of inflammatory responses to isocaloric changes in food composition as a prerequisite of personalized dietary recommendations in human twins.

DESIGN
34 monozygotic and 12 dizygotic healthy pairs of twins recruited from a twin register (HealthTwiSt, Berlin, Germany) or by public advertisements completed the study. All participants received a low fat diet (55% carbohydrate, 30% fat, 15% protein) for 6 weeks (CID1=LF thereafter) followed by 6 weeks of a high fat diet (40% carbohydrate, 45% fat, 15% protein) (CID2=HF1 after 1 week, and CID3=HF6 after 6 weeks of high fat diet). Both diets were isocloric. A physical examination, anthropometry (DEXA scan), and medical history were obtained and 12h fasted blood was collected at 8:00 a.m. on study days. Resting energy expenditure (indirect calorimetry) and physical activity level (PAL) was assessed by questionnaire and dietary food records for five days were completed before and during the study. Fasting blood levels of cytokines, chemokines and adipokines were determined by ELISA. The participants were instructed, trained and accompanied by an experienced nutritionist. Individual energy requirements were calculated based on participants REE and PAL. Participants received a list of 94 foods items and individual daily meal plans on how to exchange and combine these foods and energy intake was adjusted according to body weight if needed. Seven days before the LF, HF1 and HF6 examination days 70 percent of the food was provided to ensure standardized dietary patterns for all participants. A biopsy of periumbilical abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue was performed on each CID for gene expression analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL14550 Agilent-028004 SurePrint G3 Human GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name Version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

