TITLE
Migration-related phenotypic divergence is associated with epigenetic variation in rainbow trout

ORGANISM
Oncorhynchus mykiss

SUMMARY
Migration is essential for the reproduction and survival of many animals, yet little is understood about its underlying molecular mechanisms. We used the salmonid Oncorhynchus mykiss to gain mechanistic insight into smoltification, which is a morphological, physiological, and behavioral transition undertaken by some juveniles that culminates in a seaward migration. This species is experimentally tractable and, unlike common model species, displays intra- and inter-population variation in migration propensity. Migratory individuals can produce non-migratory progeny and vice versa, indicating a high degree of phenotypic plasticity. One potential way that phenotypic plasticity might be linked to variation in migration-related life history tactics is through epigenetic regulation of gene expression. To explore this, we quantitatively measured genome-scale DNA methylation in fin tissue using reduced representation bisulfite sequencing of F2 siblings produced from a cross between steelhead (migratory) and rainbow trout (non-migratory) lines. We identified 57 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) between smolt and resident O. mykiss juveniles. DMRs were of high magnitude, ranging from 20-62% differential methylation between life history types, and over half of the gene-associated DMRs were in transcriptional regulatory regions. Many of the DMRs encode proteins with activity relevant to migration-related transitions (e.g. circadian rhythm pathway, nervous system development, protein kinase activity). This study provides the first evidence of a relationship between epigenetic variation and life history divergence associated with a migration-related transition in any species.

DESIGN
Comparing global DNA methyldation profiles (via RRBS) of resident and smolt O. mykiss siblings using caudal fin tissue.

PLATFORM
GPL19277 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Oncorhynchus mykiss)

CITATIONS
25958780

