TITLE
Enhanced adult hippocampal neurogenesis in mice fed the marine-plant derived astaxanthin supplement: A DNA microarray-based analyses

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Astaxanthin (ASX), the most powerful antioxidant within carotenoids, has not only anti-oxidative stress and anti-infammation, but also neuroprotective effects in the preventatin of oxidative damage on various neurodegenerative diseases in vivo and in vitro. Recent studies demonstrated that ASX enhanced learning and memory performance in human and animal, but its beneficial effects on neuronal mechanism are unknown. Moreover, it is unclelar delving further into ASX-induced the possible molecular mechanisim on adult hippocampal neurogenesis (AHN). Here, we investigated whether ASX enhances AHN depend on concentration, and their related to potential molecular pathway using DNA microarray analysis. Adult male C57BL/6J mice were divided according to different consistency 0% (CON), 0.02%, 0.1%, 0.5% ASX for 4 weeks. All mice received twice injections of BrdU (50 mg/kg, i.p.) before the treatment of ASX to evaluate survival of newly generated cells. We further investigated global gene expression changes in hippocampus with treatment of 0.5% ASX, which contributed to ASX-induced AHN in order to determine potential molecular mechnisim by DNA microarray analysis. There is an increased tendency of proliferation and new-survival cells; although their siginificance is limited in 0.1% and 0.5% ASX groups for proliferation and in 0.5% ASX group for new-survival cells. Moreover, DNA microarray analysis showed upreguation of genes such as PRL, ITGA4 and IL4 associated with hippocampal plasticity and their downstream genes in 0.5% ASX group. Our results suggests that ASX supplementation enhances proliferation by PRL, and survival by ITGA4 and IL4 in the stages of adult hippocampal neurogenesis, respectively.

DESIGN
Two-condition experiment, hippocampus tissue 0% (control) and treated 0.5% ASX supplementation. Biological replicates: 4 control replicates, 4 treatment replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

