TITLE
Expression data from mouse uteri after ovariectomy and E2 treatment.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
17ß-Estradiol (E2) is well known to be associated with uterine cancer, endometriosis, and leiomyomas. Although insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) has been identified as a mediator of the uterotrophic effect of E2 in several studies, this mechanism is still not well understood. In the present study, identification of the genes modulated by a physiological dose of E2, in the uterus, has been done in ovariectomized mice using Affymetrix microarrays. The E2-induced genomic profile shows that multiple genes belonging to the IGF-I pathway are affected after exposure to E2. Two phases of regulation could be identified. First, from 0 to 6 h, the expression of genes involved in the cell cycle, growth factors, protein tyrosine phosphatases, and MAPK phosphatases is quickly upregulated by E2, while IGF-I receptor and several genes of the MAPK and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathways are downregulated. Later, i.e., from 6 to 24 h, transporters and peptidases/proteases are stimulated, whereas defense-related genes are differentially regulated by E2. Finally, cytoarchitectural genes are modulated later. The present data show that a physiological dose of E2 induces, within 24 h, a series of transcriptional events that promote the uterotrophic effect. Among these, the E2-mediated activation of the IGF-I pathway seems to play a pivotal role in the uterotrophic effect. Furthermore, the protein tyrosine phosphatases and MAPK phosphatases are likely to modulate the estrogenic uterotrophic action by targeting, at different steps, the IGF-I pathway. Keywords: E2 time course

DESIGN
Ten 10-11 weeks old C57Bl/6 mice were gonadectomized under isoflurane-induced anesthesia and sacrified seven days after GDX.  Mice  were injected s.c with E2 (0.05ug/mice) or vehicle, at 0.5, 1, 3, 6, 12 or 24 h before sacrifice. Uteri was removed and pooled before total RNA extraction. Samples was hybridized to U74Av2 Genechips (Affymetrix).

PLATFORM
GPL81 [MG_U74Av2] Affymetrix Murine Genome U74A Version 2 Array

CITATIONS
17361005

