TITLE
Fine temporal analysis of DHT transcriptional modulation of the ATM/Gadd45g signaling pathways in the mouse uterus.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
In rodents, the uterus of a mature female undergoes changes during the uterine cycle, under the control of steroid hormones. 5a-Dihydrotestosterone (DHT) is recognized to play an important role in the regulation of androgen action in normal endometrium. Using microarray technology, a screening analysis of genes responding to DHT in the uterus of ovariectomized mice, has allowed us to highlight multiple genes of the ATM/Gadd45g pathway that are modulated following exposure to DHT. Two phases of regulation were identified. In the early phase, the expression of genes involved in the G2/M arrest is rapidly increased, followed by the repression of genes of the G1/S checkpoint, and by the induction of transcriptional regulators. Later, i.e. from 12 to 24 hr, genes involved in G2/M transition, cytoarchitectural and lipid-related genes are stimulated by DHT while immunity-related genes appear to be differentially regulated by the hormone. These results show that a physiological dose of DHT induces the transcription of genes promoting the cell cycle progression in mice. Profile determination of temporal uterine gene expression at the transcriptional level enables us to suggest that the DHT modulation of genes involved in ATM/ Gadd45g signaling in an ATM- or p53-independent manner, could play an important role in the cyclical changes of uterine cells in the mouse uterus. Keywords: DHT time course

DESIGN
Ten 10-11 weeks old C57Bl/6 mice were gonadectomized under isoflurane-induced anesthesia and sacrified seven days after GDX.  Mice  were injected s.c with DHT (0.1mg/mice) or vehicle, at 0.5, 1, 3, 6, 12 or 24 h before sacrifice. Uteri was removed and pooled before total RNA extraction. Samples was hybridized to U74Av2 Genechips (Affymetrix).

PLATFORM
GPL81 [MG_U74Av2] Affymetrix Murine Genome U74A Version 2 Array

CITATIONS
18671277

