TITLE
Age-associated Changes in Basal NF-κB Function in Human CD4+ T Lymphocytes via Dysregulation of PI3 Kinase (dataset 5)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Immune impairment and high circulating level of pro-inflammatory cytokines are landmarks of human aging. However, the molecular basis of immune dysregulation and the source of inflammatory markers remain unclear. Here we demonstrate that in the absence of overt cell stimulation, gene expression mediated by the transcription factor NF-κB is higher in purified and rested human CD4+ T lymphocytes from older compared to younger individuals. This increase of NF-κB -associated transcription includes transcripts for pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1 and chemokines such as CCL2 and CXCL10. We demonstrate that NF-κB up-regulation is cell-intrinsic and mediated in part by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) activity induced in response to metabolic activity, which can be moderated by rapamycin treatment. Our observations provide direct evidence that dysregulated basal NF-κB activity may contribute to the mild pro-inflammatory state of aging.

DESIGN
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from heparinized blood using Ficoll-Paque Plus density gradient centrifugation. CD4+ T cells were obtained by positive selection using anti-human CD4 microbeads. To test the effects of drug treatment, 5x10^6 CD4+ T cells were treated with varying concentrations of rapamycin and also LY 294002 in 3 ml of RPMI 1640 medium. Control cells were also created without any added drugs. Cells were incubated for 4h in 5% CO2 at both 37°C and 4°C. After incubation, cells were harvested and collected by centrifugation. Total cellular RNA was prepared using Qiagen RNeasy protocols. Labeling and amplification were done with the standard Illumina protocol and the biotin-labeled cRNA was hybridized to Illumina's HumanHT-12 V4.0 Expression BeadChip. The arrays were washed, blocked and the biotin-labeled cRNA was detected by staining with streptavidin-Cy3.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
25553802

