TITLE
Gene duplication of type-B ARR transcription factors systematically extends transcriptional regulatory structures in Arabidopsis

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Many of duplicated genes are enriched in signaling pathways. Recently, gene duplication of kinases has been shown to provide genetic buffering and functional diversification in cellular signaling. Transcription factors (TFs) are also often duplicated. However, how duplication of TFs affects their regulatory structures and functions of target genes has not been explored at the systems level. Here, we examined regulatory and functional roles of duplication of three major ARR TFs (ARR1, 10, and 12) in Arabidopsis cytokinin signaling using wild-type and single, double, and triple deletion mutants of the TFs. Comparative analysis of gene expression profiles obtained from Arabidopsis roots in wild-type and these mutants showed that duplication of ARR TFs systematically extended their transcriptional regulatory structures, leading to enhanced robustness and diversification in functions of target genes, as well as in regulation of cellular networks of target genes. Therefore, our results suggest that duplication of TFs contributes to robustness and diversification in functions of target genes by extending transcriptional regulatory structures.

DESIGN
Duplication of TFs can confer an extension of transcriptional regulatory structures for target genes by providing new regulatory relationships between duplicated TFs and new or old target genes. To examine the nature of the extension in the regulatory structure, we performed gene expression profiling of Arabidopsis root tissues obtained from wild-type (WT) and deletion mutants of three type-B ARR1, 10, and 12. To examine how the extended regulatory structures by the duplicated ARR TFs are utilized for the responses to external CK, we generated gene expression profiles of WT Arabidopsis roots treated with mock or exogenous CK for 1 hour. Total RNAs were isolated from two biological replicates at each condition and used to measure gene expression level.

