TITLE
MicroRNA Profiling Analysis and Target Gene Prediction in Laryngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma

ORGANISM
synthetic construct

SUMMARY
Background: Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) is the most common type in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), and the development of LSCC are multistep processes accompanied by changes of molecular biology. Objective: The purpose of this study was to investigate the miRNAs basis of tumorigenesis in LSCC, and analyze the microRNAs dysregulation related with the six targeted genes (CDK1,CDK2, CDK4, MCM2, MCM3, MCM4) which were related to tumorigenesis from the screened miRNAs. Methods: A total number of 5 patients who underwent surgery for primary laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma were recruited for miRNA array analysis. LSCC tissues compared with corresponding adjacent non-neoplastic tissues were analysed by the Affymetrix GeneChip miRNA Array 3.0 to screen effective miRNAs, then mirfocus  3.0 database ( )  was adopted to  select putative regulated miRNAs of the six targeted genes. Moreover, the selected putative regulated miRNAs were also validated by qRT-PCR in another 36 patients diagnosed for LSCC. Results: Analysed by the miRNAs arrays, there were 127 miRNAs significantly related to tumorigenesis ,and 78  showed  a  higher expression  in  tumor  than  in  non-tumor  tissue while  49 presented  the  contrasting pattern(P < 0.01).Then analyzed by mirfocus  3.0 database, there were 2 putative regulated miRNAs, hsa-miR-24-3p and hsa-miR-183-5p, corresponding to three of the six targeted genes. Among the 2 putative miRNAs, hsa-miR-24-3p regulated MCM4,CDK1 and CDK4,while hsa-miR-183-5p regulated MCM4 only. Another miRNA we should focus on is hsa-miR-30a-5p, a tumor-suppressive factor, which was down-expressed obviously analysed by the miRNAs arrays. The expression of the 3 putative regulated miRNAs were also validated by qRT-PCR in another 36 patients (P < 0.05). Conclusions: The research revealed 127 miRNAs expression signature of tumorigenesis in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma,and analyzed 3 putative regulated miRNAs, hsa-miR-24-3p, hsa-miR-183-5p and hsa-miR-30a-5p, as potential diagnostic and therapeutic markers in LSCC. The result will contribute to the understanding of the molecular basis of LSCC and help to improve the treatment.

