TITLE
Comparison of gene expression profile of human trabecular meshwork cells induced by triamcinolone with dexamethasone

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
PURPOSE. Triamcinolone acetonide (TA) and dexamethasone (DEX) are corticosteroids commonly used for ocular inflammation but both can cause ocular hypertension. We investigated the differential gene expression profile of human trabecular meshwork (TM) cells in response to treatment by TA compared to that by DEX. METHODS. Total RNA was extracted from cultured human TM cells treated with TA or DEX and used for microarray gene expression analysis. The microarray experiments were repeated three times. Differentially expressed genes were identified by an empirical Bayes approach and confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR. RESULTS. 0.1 mg/ml TA treatment resulted in 15 genes up-regulated and 12 genes down-regulated while 1mg/ml TA treatment resulted in 36 genes up-regulated and 21 genes down-regulated. These genes were mainly associated with acute-phase response, cell adhesion, cell cycle and growth, growth factor, ion binding, metabolism, proteolysis and transcription factor. Two genes, MYOC and GAS1, were up-regulated and 3 genes, SENP1, ZNF343 and SOX30, were down-regulated by both TA and DEX treatment. Eight differentially expressed genes were located in known primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) loci, including MYOC, SOAT1, CYP27A1, SPOCK, SEMA6A, EGR1, GAS1 and ATP10A. CONCLUSIONS. Differential gene expression profiles of human TM cells treated by TA and DEX, and a dosage effect by TA, were revealed by microarray technology. TA and DEX treatment shared several differentially expressed genes, suggesting a common mechanism to cause ocular hypertension. Some differentially expressed genes located in the known POAG loci are potential candidates for glaucoma genes. Keywords: Differential gene expression profile

DESIGN
A total of 9 samples were used for this study. There were 3 biological replicates for each of 3 treatments.

PLATFORM
GPL4564 Stanford Human cDNA SHEW

CITATIONS
18436822

