TITLE
Core oxidative stress response (COSR) in Aspergillus nidulans

ORGANISM
Aspergillus nidulans

SUMMARY
Genome wide transcriptional changes induced by various types of oxidative stresses as well as salt stress were studied in a DatfA mutant and the appropriate control A. nidulans strains. Although a significant number of stereotypically regulated genes was identified (Core Oxidative Stress Response or COSR genes) when the global transcriptional effects of five different oxidative stress conditions were compared the number of co-regulated genes decreased to 13 when NaCl stress was included into the analyses. The appearance of only a few co-regulated genes and the great number of genes regulated merely by one certain type of stress do not support the existence of a S. cerevisiae-type Environmental Stress Response in A. nidulans. Deletion of atfA, a true functional ortholog of fission yeast’s “all-purpose” stress response transcription factor, increased the oxidative stress sensitivity of A. nidulans and affected the transcription of several genes under both unstressed and stressed conditions. The number of genes under AtfA control was quite stress-type dependent; e.g. deletion of atfA altered the transcription of a wide spectrum of genes under menadione sodium bisulfite stress but had only a minor effect on the transcriptome profiles when A. nidulans cultures were exposed to H2O2, tBOOH, NaCl and, especially, to diamide stress. These observations suggest that the function of AtfA in the regulation of various stress responses is much smaller than we thought before or other transcription factors can take over a number of AtfA’s functions when the atfA gene is deleted. It is noteworthy that both oxidative and salt stress induced the transcription of some secondary metabolite gene clusters and the deletion of atfA enhanced the stress responsiveness of further clusters. Surprisingly, certain clusters were down-regulated by the stress conditions tested and the majority of them were not stress-responsive at all. Therefore, stress dependent regulation seems to be a frequent but far not a general feature of the regulation of secondary metabolism in A. nidulans.

DESIGN
14 samples, 7 with the control strain and 7 with an DatfA strain (each series contains samples from untreated as well as menadione, low concentration hidrogen-peroxide, high concentration hidrogen-peroxide, tert-butylhydroperoxide, diamide and NaCl treated cultures)

PLATFORM
GPL19388 Agilent-031140, Aspergillus nidulans custom array [Probe Name Version]

CITATIONS
26115917

