TITLE
Transcriptome response to vanadium stress in rice roots

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa

SUMMARY
Trace concentrations of vanadium (V) have several benefits for plant growth, but high concentrations are toxic. To help characterize the cellular mechanisms underlying the toxic effects of V in plants, we present the first large-scale analysis of rice root responding to V during the early stages (1 and 3 h) of toxicity. Exposure to V triggered changes in the transcript levels of several genes related to cellular metabolic process, response to stimulus and transporters. Gene expression profiling revealed upregulated levels of genes associated with signaling and biosynthesis of auxin, abscisic acid (ABA) and jasmonic acid (JA) in V-treated rice roots. In addition, V upregulated the expression of ATP-dependent GSH-conjugated transport, ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter, and markedly downregulated of the expression of divalent cation transporters, drug/metabolite transporter (DMT) and zinceiron permease (ZIP). Among the V-specific responsive transcription factors and protein kinases, the most predominant families were NAC (NAM, ATAF, CUC) transcription factor, receptor-like cytoplasmic kinase VII (RLCK-VII) and leucinerich repeat kinase VIII (LRR-VIII). These microarray data provide a new insight into the molecular mechanism of the rice roots response to V toxicity. Trace concentrations of vanadium (V) have several benefits for plant growth, but high concentrations are toxic. To help characterize the cellular mechanisms underlying the toxic effects of V in plants, we present the first large-scale analysis of rice root responding to V during the early stages (1 and 3 h) of toxicity. Exposure to V triggered changes in the transcript levels of several genes related to cellular metabolic process, response to stimulus and transporters. Gene expression profiling revealed upregulated levels of genes associated with signaling and biosynthesis of auxin, abscisic acid (ABA) and jasmonic acid (JA) in V-treated rice roots. In addition, V upregulated the expression of ATP-dependent GSH-conjugated transport, ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter, and markedly downregulated of the expression of divalent cation transporters, drug/metabolite transporter (DMT) and zinceiron permease (ZIP). Among the V-specific responsive transcription factors and protein kinases, the most predominant families were NAC (NAM, ATAF, CUC) transcription factor, receptor-like cytoplasmic kinase VII (RLCK-VII) and leucinerich repeat kinase VIII (LRR-VIII). These microarray data provide a new insight into the molecular mechanism of the rice roots response to V toxicity.

DESIGN
Comparison of mock control and rice seedlings treated with 1 mM vanadate. Microarray RNA pool was prepared by combining a fixed volume of rice root samples collected at the following time points: 1 and 3 h.; Biological replicates: 3 control replicates, 3 vanadate-treated replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL8852 Agilent-015241 Rice Gene Expression 4x44K Microarray (Probe name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

