TITLE
Insight into Vibrio parahaemolyticus CHN25 response to artificial gastric fluid stress by transcriptomic analysis

ORGANISM
Vibrio parahaemolyticus

SUMMARY
Vibrio parahaemolyticus is the causative agent of food-borne gastroenteritis disease. Once consumed, human acid gastric fluid is perhaps one of the most important environmental stresses imposed on the bacterium. Herein, for the first time, we investigated Vibrio parahaemolyticus CHN25 response to artificial gastric fluid (AGF) stress by transcriptomic analysis. The bacterium at logarithmic growth phase (LGP) displayed lower survival rates than that at stationary growth phase (SGP) under a sub-lethal acid condition (pH 4.9). Transcriptome data revealed that 11.6% of the expressed genes in Vibrio parahaemolyticus CHN25 was up-regulated in LGP cells after exposed to AGF (pH 4.9) for 30 min, including those involved in sugar transport, nitrogen metabolism, energy production and protein biosynthesis, whereas 14.0% of the genes was down-regulated, such as ABC transporter and flagellar biosynthesis genes. In contrast, the AGF stress only elicited 3.4% of the genes from SGP cells, the majority of which were attenuated in expression. Moreover, the number of expressed regulator genes was also substantially reduced in SGP cells. Comparison of transcriptome profiles further revealed forty-one growth-phase independent genes in the AGF stress, however, half of which displayed distinct expression features between the two growth phases. Vibrio parahaemolyticus seemed to have evolved a number of molecular strategies for coping with the acid stress. The data here will facilitate future studies for environmental stresses and pathogenicity of the leading food-borne pathogen worldwide.

DESIGN
When V.parahemolyticus CHN25 grown to log phase and stationary phase at 37°C in TSB-3% NaCl, different cultures were subsequently exposed to artificial gastric fluid at 37°C for 30 min. Two independent experiments were performed at each phase for microarray expreriments.

PLATFORM
GPL19239 Agilent-057895 Vibrio parahaemolyticus RIMD 2210633 8X15K array [Probe Name Version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

