TITLE
Gene expression profile of hemocytes from Drosophila melanogaster on lipid-enriched diet compared to normal diet

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Long-term consumption of fatty foods is associated with obesity, macrophage  activation and inflammation, metabolic imbalance, and a reduced lifespan. We took  advantage of Drosophila genetics to investigate the role of macrophages and the  pathway(s) that govern their response to dietary stress. Flies fed a lipid-rich diet  presented with increased fat storage, systemic JAK-STAT activation, reduced insulin  sensitivity and hyperglycaemia, and a shorter lifespan. Drosophila macrophages  scavenged lipids and produced the type 1 cytokine upd3, in a scavenger-receptor  (croquemort) and JNK-dependent manner. Genetic depletion of macrophages, or  macrophage-specific silencing of upd3 decreased JAK-STAT activation and rescued  insulin sensitivity and the lifespan of Drosophila, but did not decrease fat storage.  NF-κB signalling made no contribution to the phenotype observed. These results  identify an evolutionarily conserved ‘scavenger receptor-JNK-Type 1 cytokine’  cassette in macrophages, which controls glucose metabolism and reduces lifespan in  Drosophila maintained on a lipid-rich diet via activation of the JAK-STAT pathway  Long-term consumption of fatty foods is associated with obesity, macrophage  activation and inflammation, metabolic imbalance, and a reduced lifespan. We took  advantage of Drosophila genetics to investigate the role of macrophages and the  pathway(s) that govern their response to dietary stress. Flies fed a lipid-rich diet  presented with increased fat storage, systemic JAK-STAT activation, reduced insulin  sensitivity and hyperglycaemia, and a shorter lifespan. Drosophila macrophages  scavenged lipids and produced the type 1 cytokine upd3, in a scavenger-receptor  (croquemort) and JNK-dependent manner. Genetic depletion of macrophages, or  macrophage-specific silencing of upd3 decreased JAK-STAT activation and rescued  insulin sensitivity and the lifespan of Drosophila, but did not decrease fat storage.  NF-κB signalling made no contribution to the phenotype observed. These results  identify an evolutionarily conserved ‘scavenger receptor-JNK-Type 1 cytokine’  cassette in macrophages, which controls glucose metabolism and reduces lifespan in  Drosophila maintained on a lipid-rich diet via activation of the JAK-STAT pathway

DESIGN
5 biological samples were FACS-sorted from different batches of Drosophila melanogaster males after 30 days on 15% lipid enriched diet (n=5) and control diet (n=5)

PLATFORM
GPL19404 Agilent-068787 D. melanogaster Oligo Microarray 8x60K v1

CITATIONS
25601202

