TITLE
Combinatorial targeting of nuclear export and translation of RNA inhibits aggressive B-cell lymphoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Aggressive double and triple hit (DH/TH) DLBCL feature activation of Hsp90 stress pathways.  Herein, we show that Hsp90 controls post-transcriptional dynamics of key mRNA species including those encoding BCL6, MYC and BCL2. Using a proteomics approach, we found that Hsp90 binds to and maintains activity of eIF4E (eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E). EIF4E drives nuclear export and translation of BCL6, MYC and BCL2 mRNA. eIF4E RIP-sequencing in DLBCL suggests that nuclear eIF4E controls an extended program that includes BCR signaling, cellular metabolism and epigenetic regulation. Accordingly, eIF4E was required for survival of DLBCL including the most aggressive subtypes DH/TH lymphomas. Indeed, eIF4E inhibition induces tumor regression in cell line and patient-derived tumorgrafts of TH-DLBCL, even in the presence of elevated Hsp90 activity. Targeting Hsp90 is typically limited by counter-regulatory elevation of Hsp70B, which induces resistance to Hsp90 inhibitors. Surprisingly, we identify Hsp70 mRNA as an eIF4E target. In this way, eIF4E inhibition can overcome drug resistance to Hsp90 inhibitors. Accordingly, rational combinatorial inhibition of eIF4E and Hsp90 inhibitors resulted in cooperative anti-lymphoma activity in DH/TH DLBCL in vitro and in vivo.

DESIGN
We found that eIF4E activity regulates the nuclear export of BCL6, MYC, and BCL2 in DH/TH DLBCLs. To determine the extent of nuclear eIF4E activity in DH/TH DLBCLs and how these programs can support the oncogenic activity of BCL6, MYC and/or BCL2 transcripts, we conducted eIF4E-RIP of nuclear RNA followed by RNA-sequencing in OCI-Ly1 cells in triplicates. To understand the changes in gene expression after ribavarin in a clinically relevant sample, we generated a patient-derived xenograft (PDX) in NSG mice from a de-identified specimen isolated from a patient prior to treatment harboring a triple-hit ABC-type DLBCL. PDX cells from passage four (PDX-4) were implanted into NSG mice. When tumors were palpable, mice were randomized to receive vehicle or 80 mg/kg/b.i.d. ribavarin intraperitoneally for 10 days.  We isolated RNA from tumors treated with vehicle (n=2) or ribavarin (n=2) and performed mRNA-seq.

PLATFORM
GPL16791 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
26603836

