TITLE
Proteus mirabilis mrpJ microarrays

ORGANISM
Proteus mirabilis HI4320

SUMMARY
This series of microarrays compares gene expression by the bacterial pathogen Proteus mirabilis when the transcriptional regulator mrpJ is deleted or induced to levels found during experimental urinary tract infection. The enteric bacterium Proteus mirabilis is associated with a significant number of catheter-associated urinary tract infections. Strict regulation of the antagonistic processes of adhesion and motility, mediated by fimbriae and flagella, respectively, is essential for successful disease progression. Previously, the transcriptional regulator MrpJ, which is encoded by the mrp fimbrial operon, has been shown to repress both swimming and swarming motility. Here we show that MrpJ affects a wide array of cellular processes beyond adherence and motility. Microarray analysis found that expression of mrpJ mimicking expression levels that occur during UTI leads to differential expression of 217 genes related to, among others, bacterial virulence, type VI secretion and metabolism. We probed the molecular mechanism of transcriptional regulation through MrpJ using reporter assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Two virulence-associated target genes, the flagellar master regulator flhDC and mrp itself, appear to be regulated through a binding site proximal to the transcriptional start, complemented by a more distantly situated enhancer site. Furthermore, an mrpJ deletion mutant colonized the bladders of mice at significantly lower levels in a transurethral model of infection. Additionally, we observe that mrpJ is widely conserved in a collection of recent clinical isolates, leading us to conclude that our results elucidate an unanticipated role of MrpJ as a global regulator of P. mirabilis virulence.

DESIGN
Four biological replicates were analyzed for each set of arrays (P. mirabilis HI4320 wild type vs. ΔmrpJ, and vector pLX3607 vs. mrpJ plasmid pLX3805).

PLATFORM
GPL9078 UMich_Proteus mirabilis_v1.0 3.7k array

CITATIONS
25847961

