TITLE
Genome-wide identification of vegetative phase transition-associated microRNAs and target predictions using degradome sequencing in Malus hupehensis

ORGANISM
Malus hupehensis

SUMMARY
Background: A long juvenile period between germination and flowering is a common characteristic among fruit trees, including Malus hupehensis (Pamp.) Rehd., which is an apple rootstock widely used in China. microRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in the regulation of phase transition and reproductive growth processes. Results: M. hupehensis RNA libraries, one adult and one juvenile phase, were constructed using tree leaves and underwent high-throughput sequencing. We identified 42 known miRNA families and 172 novel miRNAs. We also identified 127 targets for 25 known miRNA families and 168 targets for 35 unique novel miRNAs using degradome sequencing. The identified miRNA targets were categorized into 58 biological processes, and the 123 targets of known miRNAs were associated with phase transition processes. The KEGG analysis revealed that these targets were involved in starch and sucrose metabolism, and plant hormone signal transduction. Expression profiling of miRNAs and their targets indicated multiple regulatory functions in the phase transition. The higher expression level of mdm-miR156 and lower expression level of mdm-miR172 in the juvenile phase leaves implied that these two small miRNAs regulated the phase transition. mdm-miR160 and miRNA393, which regulate genes involved in auxin signal transduction, could also be involved in controlling this process. The identification of known and novel miRNAs and their targets provides new information on this regulatory process in M. hupehensis, which will contribute to the understanding of miRNA functions during growth, phase transition and reproduction in woody fruit trees. Conclusions: A comprehensive study on M. hupehensis miRNAs related to the juvenile to adult phase transition was performed. The combination of sRNA and degradome sequencing can be used to better illustrate the profiling of hormone-regulated miRNAs and miRNA targets involving complex regulatory networks, which will contribute to the understanding of miRNA functions during growth, phase transition and reproductive growth in perennial woody fruit trees.

DESIGN
In June, ‘Adult phase’ (A) leaves were collected as mixed samples from the tops of 18 6-year-old M. hupehensis (Pamp.) Rehd. trees and ‘Juvenile phase’ (J) leaves were collected from the base.And were used for small RNA and degradome sequencing for identification of vegetative phase transition-associated microRNAs and target predictions using degradome sequencing in Malus hupehensis.

PLATFORM
GPL19425 Illumina Genome Analyzer (Malus hupehensis) GPL19426 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Malus hupehensis)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

