TITLE
GATA2 facilitates steroid receptor coactivator (SRC) recruitment to the androgen receptor (AR) complex

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The androgen receptor (AR) is a key driver of prostate cancer (PC), even in the state of castration-resistant PC (CRPC), and frequently even after treatment with second-line hormonal therapies such as abiraterone and enzalutamide. The persistence of AR activity via both ligand-dependent and ligand-independent (including constitutively active AR splice variants) mechanisms highlights the unmet need for alternative approaches to block AR signaling in CRPC. We investigated the transcription factor GATA2 as a regulator of AR signaling and a novel therapeutic target in PC. We demonstrate that GATA2 directly promotes AR expression (both full-length and splice variant), resulting in a strong positive correlation between GATA2 and AR expression in PC (cell lines and patient specimens). Conversely, GATA2 expression is repressed by androgen and AR, suggesting a negative feedback regulatory loop that, upon androgen deprivation, derepresses GATA2 to contribute to AR overexpression in CRPC. Simultaneously, GATA2 is necessary for optimal transcriptional activity of AR (both full-length and splice variant). GATA2 co-localizes with AR and FOXA1 on chromatin to enhance recruitment of steroid receptor coactivators (SRCs) and formation of the transcriptional holocomplex. In agreement with these important functions, high GATA2 expression and transcriptional activity predicted for worse clinical outcome in PC patients. A GATA2 small molecule inhibitor suppressed the expression and transcriptional function of AR (both full-length and splice variant) and exerted potent anticancer activity against PC cell lines. We propose pharmacological inhibition of GATA2 as a “first-in-field” approach to target AR expression and function and improve outcomes in CRPC.

DESIGN
LNCaP cells were transfected with control siRNA (3), GATA2 siRNA (3) or AR siRNA for 72 hours.

PLATFORM
GPL9793 Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0 ST Array [CDF: HuEx-1_0-st-v2,coreR3,A20071112,EP]

CITATIONS
25489091

