TITLE
Transcriptomic Profiles of Xylose-utilizing Zymomonas mobilis 8b to Pretreatment Inhibitor Furfural

ORGANISM
Zymomonas mobilis

SUMMARY
Background: Lignocellulosic biomass is a promising renewable feedstock for the microbial production of fuels. To release the major fermentable sugars such as glucose and xylose, pretreatment, hydrolysis, and subsequent conditioning of biomass feedstock are needed. During this process, many toxic compounds are produced or introduced which subsequently inhibit microbial growth and in many cases the production titer and rate. An understanding of the toxic effects of compounds found in hydrolysate on the fermentation microorganism is critical to improving biofuel yields in the process. One of the inhibitory compounds is furfural, liberated from hemicelluloses, which strongly inhibits the cell growth and ethanol production especially from xylose. Zymomonas mobilis is a capable ethanologenic bacterium with high ethanol productivity and high levels of ethanol tolerance. The development of robust biocatalyst to tolerate the lignocellulosic pretreatment inhibitors is one of the key elements for economic biofuel production. Results: In this study, the molecular responses of Z. mobilis to furfural, one major pretreatment inhibitor, were investigated using transcriptomic approaches of chip-based microarray. Furfural shock time course experiment with 3 g/L furfural supplemented when cells reach exponential phase and stress response experiment in the presence of 2 g/L furfural from the beginning of fermentation were carried out to study the short and long-term effect of furfural on 8b physiological and transcriptional profiles. The presence and supplementation of furfural negatively affect 8b growth in terms of final biomass and the fermentation time. Transcriptomic studies indicated that the response of 8b to furfural is dynamic, complex and differences exist between short-term shock response and long-term stress response. However, the gene function categories are similar with most downregulated genes related to translation and biosynthesis, while the furfural-upregulated genes were mostly related to cellular processes of general stress response and energy metabolism. Conclusions: Similar to previous report that acetate inhibited the growth of Z. mobilis 8b in RM using glucose or xylose as carbon source, the existence or supplementation of another major hydrolysate inhibitor furfural also inhibited 8b growth with slowing the substrate utilization and ethanol production. The difference between carbon sources is more dramatic than that of the major hydrolysate inhibitors of both NH4OAc (GSE57553) and furfural (this study). Several gene targets have been selected for genetic studies with promising preliminary results.

DESIGN
In this study, the molecular responses of Z. mobilis to furfural, one major pretreatment inhibitor, were investigated using transcriptomic approaches of chip-based microarray. Furfural shock time course experiment with 3 g/L furfural supplemented when cells reach exponential phase (0min before furfural shock, 15min and 60min post-furfural shock) and stress response experiment in the presence of 2 g/L furfural from the beginning of fermentation were carried out to study the short and long-term effect of furfural on 8b physiological and transcriptional profiles. Three biological replicates were used for each condition.

