TITLE
Toxicogenomics analysis of placenta samples from mice exposed to different doses of BPA

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Bisphenol A (BPA) is a widespread Endocrine Disrupter mainly used in food contact plastics. Several evidences support BPA adverse effects, especially on susceptible groups such as pregnant women. The present study considered placental development - relevant for pregnancy outcomes and fetal nutrition/programming - as a potential target of BPA. Pregnant CD-1 mice were administered per os with vehicle, 0.5 (BPA05) or 50 mg/kg (BPA50) body weight (bw)/die of BPA, from gestational day (GD) 1 to GD11. At GD12, BPA50 induced significant degeneration and necrosis of giant cells, increased vacuolization in the junctional zone in absence of glycogen accumulation and reduction of the spongiotrophoblast layer. BPA05 induced a significant nuclear accumulation of β-catenin in trophoblasts of the labyrinthine and spongiotrophoblast layers, supporting an activation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway. Transcriptomic analysis indicated a BPA05 promotion and a BPA50 inhibition of blood vessels development and branching supported by the morphological observation of decreased and increased total vessels area in the labyrinth layers upon BPA05 and BPA50 treatments, respectively, with BPA50 also inducing a decrease in vessels number.  These mechanisms involve, respectively, CREB and Wnt/β-catenin pathways for BPA05 and AhR/ARNT pathway for BPA50, as deducted by the transcription factor binding analysis.  These results show that BPA differently affects mouse placental development depending on the dose level. In particular, the 0.5 mg/kw bw, in the range of dose level used to set the Tolerable Daily Intake, may elicit not negligible alterations whose relevance for human health has to be carefully evaluated.

DESIGN
Three conidtions experiment: Control, BPA 0.5 mg/kg bw die; BPA 50 mg/kg bw die. Biological replicates: three control replicates; four replicates per treatment. Technical replicates: 2 (dye swap) per biological replica

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
26063408 , 26484192

