TITLE
Endometrial expression profiling in women with recurrent early pregnancy loss

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Pregnancy loss is the most common complication of human pregnancy. Recurrent early  pregnancy loss (REPL) has multiple etiologies, including endometrial dysregulation leading to  “suboptimal” implantation. Although the implantation process is tightly regulated in Eutherian  (placental) mammals, the molecular factors contributing to dysregulated endometrial gene  expression patterns in women with REPL are largely unknown. We hypothesized that genes  that gained novel expression in the endometria of mammals that evolved in the Eutherian stemlineage,  coincident with the evolution of pregnancy, are likely essential for establishment and  maintenance of normal pregnancy and are, therefore, good candidates for genes whose  expression may be dysregulated in disorders such as REPL. To test this hypothesis, we took an  evolutionary forward genomics approach to characterize gene expression profiles of midsecretory  endometria from women with REPL associated with abnormal endometria based  either on histology or molecular expression of cyclin E. We identified 58 genes that were  differentially expressed (P < 0.001) between women with out-of-phase histological dating vs  normal histology, and 81 genes that were differentially expressed (P < 0.001) between women  with abnormally elevated cyclin E levels vs normal cyclin E. Remarkably, genes that were  recruited into endometrial expression during the evolution of pregnancy in Eutherian mammals  were significantly enriched for dysregulated genes (P=0.002 for histology, P=0.021 for cyclin E),  as well as for immune and signaling pathways with essential roles in endometrial biology. Thus,  our novel evolutionary-based forward genomics approach identified genes whose dysregulation  during the mid-secretory phase likely contributes to the molecular etiologies of recurrent early  pregnancy loss.

DESIGN
Total RNA obtained from mid luteal phase endometrium (two replicates per biopsy) from women with recurrent early pregnancy loss (REPL). Endometrial gene expression levels were compared 1) between women with out-of-phase (n=10) and normal histological dating (n=22), 2) between women with abnormally elevated (n=9) and normal (n=23) cyclin E levels. For 5 additional women with abnormally high cyclin E levels, biopsy samples were collected before and after progesterone treatment to investigate the gene expression profiles in response to progesterone.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
25586782

