TITLE
TDRD6 instructs correct assembly of mRNPs in the chromatoid body to potentiate UPF1 dependent mRNA decay.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
RNA sequencing of heterozygote or Tudor domain contian protein 6 (TDRD6) knockout round spermatid cells. Chromatoid bodies (CBs) are germ cell-specific organelles of largely unknown function. CBs harbor various RNA species, RNA-associated proteins and proteins of the tudor domain family such as TDRD6. Proteome analysis of purified CBs revealed components of the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay machinery such as UPF1. TDRD6 is essential for UPF1 localization to CBs, for UPF1-UPF2 interaction, and for assembly of UPFs and other RNA binding proteins into super-complexes. In absence of TDRD6, the association of some mRNAs with UPF1 is impaired, and the long 3’ UTR-stimulated but not the exon junction complex-stimulated pathway of NMD is distorted. Reduced association of mRNAs with UPF1 correlated with increased stability and presence in polysome fractions, i.e. enhanced translational activity. Thus, we define CBs as sites of UPF1-dependent mRNA degradation and provide evidence for the requirement for NMD in spermiogenesis. This function of CBs depends on TDRD6-promoted assembly of mRNA decay enzymes within mRNPs.

DESIGN
RNA was extracted from quadruplicate samples and libraries generated for sequencing using the NEBNext Ultra Directional RNA Library Prep Kit (New England Biolabs) at the Deep Sequencing Group SFB 655, Biotechnology Center of Technische Universität Dresden. After enrichment and XP bead (Agencourt AMPure Kit; Beckman Coulter, Inc.) purification, quality control was done using Fragment AnalyzerTM (Advanced Analytical). The bar-coded libraries were equimolarly pooled and subjected to 76 bp single-end sequencing on Illumina HiSeq 2000, resulting in an average of 33 million reads per sample.

PLATFORM
GPL17021 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

