TITLE
The epigenetic processes of meiosis in male mice are broadly affected by the widely used herbicide atrazine [ChIP-Seq]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Environmental factors such as pesticides are widely used in the agriculture of many countries and their negative impact on human health and fertility are largely unknown. There is a rapidly growing body of evidence that human reproductive health is negatively affected by various environmental factors, including life style and exposure to chemical compounds such as certain drugs and pesticides. Sexually reproducing organisms produce haploid gametes via a process called meiosis. Meiosis is dependent on androgen action within the testis. Pesticides and herbicides interfere with natural hormones system and are considered to be endocrine disruptors. We hypothesize that atrazine (ATZ), a herbicide used globally, adversely affects meiosis. To test this idea we used the mouse as a model organism.  Mice were treated for a three weeks with atrazine at a concentration of 100 mg/l in drinking water nearly corresponding to 25mg/kg/day. To access the extent of the toxic effect of atrazine on the epigenetic modifications on genome wide level we performed Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) using antibody against H3K4me3 followed by high throughput sequencing. Analysis of H3K4me3 marks revealed that 823 genomic loci were affected.  H3K4me3 marks are increased occupancy in highly overexpressed Speer and Trim45 genes and decreased in Entd4, Slc25a37 and LoxL2 genes. Changes in H3K4me3 occupancy in these genes may reflect answers to DNA damages in ATZ treated testis tissue. Eighty seven of differential H3K4me3 peaks are associated with meiosis specific Double Strand  Breaks (DSB) sites, showing that ATZ treatment affect DSBs repair in meiosis. Together, our data demonstrate the negative effect of atrazine on meiosis in mice.

DESIGN
Genome wide analyze H3K4me3 marks distribution in testes tissue from ATZ treated animals and control.

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
26518232

LIBSTRATS
:CHIP-SEQ
