TITLE
V. vinifera 'Cabernet sauvignon' and V. aestivalis 'Norton' innoculated with Erysiphe necator conidiospores

ORGANISM
Vitis aestivalis ; Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
we analyzed pathogen-induced changes in the transcriptome of Vitis vinifera ‘Cabernet sauvignon’ and Vitis aestivalis ‘Norton’ by conducting a large-scale study to measure transcript abundance at 0, 4, 8, 12, 24, and 48 hours post-treatment in conidiospore- and mock-inoculated leaves using Affymetrix GeneChip Vitis vinifera Genome Array Keywords: time course

DESIGN
sixty plants were grown in each of two identical growth chamber labeled as Inoculation and Mock-inoculation under same conditions. Pairs of vines of same size were labeled, one with an “I”, the other with a “M” prefix for “inoculated” and “mock”. The vines in each pair received the same ID number. This resulted in balanced groups for inoculated and mock-inoculated vines. “I” and “M” vines of a pair were placed in corresponding locations on the bench of the two growth chambers. The locations of the vines were determined by randomizing their ID numbers. Thus, the “I” and “M” groups were balanced according to their size and to their locations within the growth chamber.  All vines were positioned at the same height from the light source. The locations of the individual plants within the growth chamber were recorded. At a time point, 10 randomly selected pairs of plants were sampled. (For example, at 8 hours post-inoculation, vines I-3, I-17, I -23, ..etc., and vines M-3, M-17, M-23, ...etc. were sampled from the “I” and the “M” growth chambers, respectively). The 10 corresponding leaves were combined into a single sample. At the next time point, another set of randomly selected 10 pairs were sampled from among the remaining plants, and so on. This random selection was independent from the random selection implemented to determine the location of the vines in the growth chambers

PLATFORM
GPL1320 [Vitis_Vinifera] Affymetrix Vitis vinifera (Grape) Genome Array

CITATIONS
17993546

