TITLE
The Mycobacterium tuberculosis Clp Gene Regulator is Required for in vitro Reactivation from Hypoxia-induced Dormancy

ORGANISM
Mycobacterium tuberculosis CDC1551

SUMMARY
The isogenic Mtb:ΔRv2745c mutant is significantly more sensitive normoxia conditions after a period of hypoxia, relative to wild-type Mtb, implicating a role for ClgR in response to reactivation, in vivo. Both hypoxia and reaeration treatment led to dysregulation of the σH regulon in the isogenic mutant, Mtb:ΔRv2745c. Induction of clgR in Mtb did lead to Clp protease induction, indicating that clgR plays a role in differntially activating downstream genes in a condition dependent manner. Disruption of genes involved in the dosR regulon, the Enduring Hypoxia Response, lipid synthesis, and mycolic acid synthesis also occurred in the knock out, implicating clgR as a possible regulator of downstream signaling cascades that facilitate Mtb survival. There was also a differnetial response of genes that are known Clp protease targets, in addition to potential Clp protease targets that had similar induction patterns as known Clp protease targets.

DESIGN
At different time points, following hypoxia (day 1, day 5, and day 7) and reaeration (1 hour, 4 hour, 6 hour, 12 hour, 24 hour, and 48 hour) treatments M. tuberculosis CDC1551 cultures, RNA was extracted and labeled with Cy5. RNA was also extracted from pre-hypoxia (t=0) time points and labeled with Cy3. These samples were cohybridized on M. tuberculosis CDC1551 whole genome microarrays using biological triplicate samples (i.e. samples derived from three distinct cultures and treatments) and thus three unique datasets were generated for each of the three time points for Mtb. Similar experiments were performed for an isogenic Rv2745c (clgR) mutant in Mtb CDC1551 which was generated by allelic exchange.

PLATFORM
GPL18320 MYcroarray Mycobacterium tuberculosis str. H37Rv and str. CDC1551 array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

