TITLE
Gene transcription profiling in wild and laboratory-exposed eels reveals common responses to low temperature and chronic pollution exposure

ORGANISM
Anguilla anguilla

SUMMARY
Aquatic ecosystems are subjected to a variety of man-induced stressors but also vary spatially and temporally due to variation in natural factors. In such complex environments, it remains difficult for ecotoxicologists to evaluate the effects of contaminants in wild organisms. The aim of the present study was to test the possibility to detect and unravel the effects of different anthropogenic and natural factors on wild fish by the use of a DNA microarray. Transcriptomic profiles from laboratory-exposed and wild fish sampled along a contamination gradient were compared. During laboratory experiments, fish were exposed to pollutants or natural factors under levels that were closed to those found in the sampling sites. A strong difference was observed between the transcriptomic patterns of wild and laboratory-exposed animals, suggesting a general stress induced by captivity in laboratory. Surprisingly, animals acclimatized to cold temperature clustered with fish from the most contaminated sites and shared common genes involved notably in epigenetic mechanisms. A possible energy saving strategy was suggested in cold-acclimated animals. This result may suggest that animals chronically exposed to contaminants develop a general defense/adaptation strategy against pollution through a general shunt in their basal metabolism, whatever the type of contaminants.

DESIGN
84 samples were analyzed from wild and laboratory animals (5 individuals per condition or sampling site). Seven sampling wild sites were selected in Canada (St. Jean, Sud-Ouest, St. François, St. Pierre) and in France (Dordogne, Garonne, Gironde) on the basis of their known gradient of contamination by metallic and organic pollutants previously described in Baillon et al., in press. Each sample were hybridized with a same reference on array (30 samples from reference site (Certes, France) collected in spring 2011 and 2012. Animals from laboratory exposures were described below.

