TITLE
Transcriptomic study of the sex differentiation process in turbot

ORGANISM
Scophthalmus maximus

SUMMARY
Gonad is a bipotential tissue that depending on the genetic and environmental inputs its final phenotype will be determined. Gonadal development is a very complex process because from an undifferentiated gonad the future testis or ovary will be formed. To better understand the complexity of the gonad plasticity throughout development we explored the transcriptomic landscape of gonads from undifferentiated to juvenile fish. For this study we have used turbot (Scophthalmus maximus) that presents one of the most remarkable sexual dimorphism in cultured fish species. With the aim of identifying gene patterns for each gonad developmental stages a microarray species-specific enriched by reproduction- and immune-related genes was assessed. Further genes with sex-differential mRNA expression were mapped in the sex- and growth-QTL (quantitative trait loci) markers. Data revealed that gonadal transcriptome prevail in front of fish biometry as it was possible to classify gonads according to sexual development status by using gene expression profiles rather than their age or size. The same classification was observed with a selection of a subset of reproduction-related genes showing the importance of gene profiles for each of the developing gonadal stage. Overall microarray data showed the importance of the level of expression (intensity) rather than the number of genes found in each development period. Larger numbers of differentially expressed genes (DEG) were found in the differentiating gonads when compared to ovaries and much smaller number resulted when compared to testis. However, more number of DEG was found in testis when compared to ovaries. The earliest presence of cyp19a1a, the key female sex differentiation gene, was found at 90 dpf together with its transcription factor foxl2 showing at the same time a positive correlation with other genes related to extracellular matrix (ecm2), immune system (irf5) or methylation (sall1). The presence of male-related genes like sox9 was evidenced at early developmental stages (70 and 90 dpf) while expression of dmrt3 started not earlier than 150 dpf, coinciding when larger number of male-related genes were found. All developmental stages presented genes related to immune system and epigenetic mechanisms revealing their importance during gonadal development. Sex-QTLs showed larger amount of sex-differential transcripts in the linkage group 6 and 21 both in males and females but transcripts mapped near growth-QTLs were only found in females. Here it is presented the first assessment of the expression profiles observed in the gonads at different developmental stages by identifying genes responsible for male or female traits. It has been identified gene clusters for each developmental stages and gene network interactions for each sexual phenotype. The expression of known male and female-related genes were precisely described throughout gonadal development as well as the expression of other genes with an unknown reproduction function which have been identified for the first time during sexual development process. In addition, it was possible to localize some of these genes on the sex- and growth-QTLs. The data presented here can help to better understand the reproduction system in cultured fish species and improved selection breeding programs to increase their productivity.

DESIGN
30 turbot gonad samples were analyzed belonging to five different gonad development stages: pre-undifferentiated (4), undifferentiated (7), differentiating (8) and juveniles (11). Juveniles were also divided by sex in male juveniles (5) and female juveniles (6)

PLATFORM
GPL19564 Agilent-038160 USC Turbot 45k Custom  array v1.0 (Probe name version)

CITATIONS
26586209

