TITLE
Effects of the anti-microbial contaminant triclocarban on the reproductive function and ovarian transcriptome of the fathead minnow (Pimephales promelas)

ORGANISM
Pimephales promelas

SUMMARY
Triclocarban (TCC) is a widely used antimicrobial agent that is routinely detected in surface waters. The present study was designed to examine TCC’s efficacy and mode of action as a reproductive toxicant in fish. Reproductively mature Pimephales promelas were continuously exposed to either 1 or 5 μg TCC/L, 0.5 μg 17β-trenbolone (TRB)/L or a mixture (MIX) of 5 μg TCC and 0.5 μg TRB/L for 22 d and a variety of reproductive and endocrine-related endpoints were examined. The data were evaluated to answer several key questions: first, whether exposure to TCC could be linked with an ecologically-relevant adverse outcome, i.e., impaired reproduction; second, whether the present study provided additional support for augmentation of androgen action as an endocrine-disrupting mode of action for TCC; and third, whether there were any novel and/or plausible linkages between changes in the ovarian transcriptome and the apical responses observed in females that could support adverse outcome pathway development and/or further hypothesis-driven testing.

DESIGN
Fathead minnows were randomly paired (one male, one female) and placed in tanks at a density of two pairs per tank with six replicate tanks per treatment. Pairs were separated by a water permeable mesh divider and each pair had its own breeding substrate. The fish were held in the test system, receiving UV-treated, filtered Lake Superior (control) water only, for a 21 d acclimation period during which the fecundity and fertility of each pair were assessed daily. After 21 d, exposures were initiated with pairs that had spawned successfully during acclimation. Fish were exposed continuously to target test concentrations of 0 (Lake Superior control), TCC (1 and 5 µg/L), TRB (0.5 μg/L), or a mixture of the two chemicals (5 μg TCC and 0.5 μg TRB/L) for 22 d.  Water concentrations of TCC and TRB were determined in stock solutions and all exposure tanks every two to three days. General water quality characteristics (mean ± SD) measured regularly over the course of the Experiment were: temperature, 24.8 ± 0.7 oC; pH, 7.87 ± 0.04; dissolved oxygen, 6.8 ± 0.35 mg/L. Ovary RNA samples from twenty four fish (n=5 for all treatments except TRB alone; n=4) were selected for microarray analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL10259 Agilent-019597 custom fathead minnow 60mer (8x15k)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

