TITLE
Genetic Variation Determines PPARγ Function and Antidiabetic Drug Response In Vivo [RNA-seq]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
SNPs affecting disease risk often reside in non-coding genomic regions. Here we show that SNPs are highly enriched at mouse strain-selective adipose tissue binding sites for PPARγ, a nuclear receptor for antidiabetic drugs. Many such SNPs alter binding motifs for PPARγ or cooperating factors, and functionally regulate nearby genes whose expression is strain-selective and imbalanced in heterozygous F1 mice. Moreover, genetically-determined binding of PPARγ accounts for mouse strain-specific transcriptional effects of TZD drugs, providing proof-of- concept for personalized medicine related to nuclear receptor genomic occupancy. In human fat, motif-altering SNPs cause differential PPARγ binding, provide a molecular mechanism for some expression quantitative trait loci, and are risk factors for dysmetabolic traits in genome- wide association studies. One PPARγ motif-altering SNP is associated with HDL levels and other metabolic syndrome parameters. Thus, natural genetic variation in PPARγ genomic occupancy determines individual disease risk and drug response.

DESIGN
Comparison of 5 RNA-seq experiments between 2 strains of mice differing in diet and fat depot. One of the experiments was evaluation of the response to a drug Rosiglitazone. Our RNA-seq data comprises primarily of 4 main experiments: The first experiment consists of samples taken from 2 strains of mice and their F1 progeny The samples are all taken from the same depot and when the mice were fed the same chow diet The second experiment has 2 parts, the first one involves samples taken from the 2 strains from the same eWAT depot when they were kept on a Low Fat Diet (LFD) This first part serves as a control for the second one in which the mice were treated with a drug, rosiglitazone in conjunction with a LFD The third experiment consists of samples taken from mice being fed on LFD. The samples are taken from the  eWAT depot for both the strains. The fourth experiment consists of samples taken from mice being fed on LFD. The samples are taken from the  iWAT depot for both the strains. We also have a solitary sample from a GRO-seq experiment which was done on eWAT in a B6 strain of mice being fed a LFD eWAT: epididymal White Adipose Tissue iWAT: inguinal White Adipose Tissue LFD-12w: mice were fed a control low fat diet (Research Diet D12450B) chow: mice were fed standard rodent chow Diet LFD w/rosiglitazone: Drug rosiglitazone (Cayman Chemicals) was incorporated into low fat diet D12450B by Research Diets at 36mg/kg of diet. Mice received control low fat diet for 10 weeks (age 6-16 weeks), and the rosiglitazone-containing diet versus control diet for the final 2 weeks (until sacrifice at 18 weeks) LFD control for rosi: mice were fed a control low fat diet (Research Diet D12450B)

