TITLE
Gene expression analysis of pig cumulus-oocyte complexes stimulated in vitro with follicle stimulating hormone or epidermal growth factor-like peptides

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
Background: The gonadotropin-induced resumption of oocyte meiosis in preovulatory follicles is preceded by expression of epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like peptides, amphiregulin (AREG) and epiregulin (EREG), in mural granulosa and cumulus cells. Both the gonadotropins and the EGF-like peptides possess the capacity to stimulate resumption of oocyte meiosis in vitro via activation of a broad signaling network in cumulus cells. To better understand the rapid genomic actions of gonadotropins (FSH) and EGF-like peptides, we analyzed transcriptomes of cumulus cells at 3 h after their stimulation. Methods: We hybridized aRNA from cumulus cells to a pig oligonucleotide microarray and compared the transcriptomes of FSH- and AREG/EREG-stimulated cumulus cells with untreated control cells and vice versa. The identified over- and underexpressed genes were subjected to functional genomic analysis according to their molecular and cellular functions. The expression pattern of 50 selected genes with a known or potential function in ovarian development was verified by real-time qRT-PCR. Results: Both FSH and AREG/EREG increased the expression of genes associated with regulation of cell proliferation, cell migration, blood coagulation and extracellular matrix remodeling. FSH alone induced the expression of genes involved in inflammatory response and in the response to reactive oxygen species. Moreover, FSH stimulated the expression of genes closely related to some ovulatory events either exclusively or significantly more than AREG/EREG (AREG, ADAMTS1, HAS2, TNFAIP6, PLAUR, PLAT, and HSD17B7). In contrast to AREG/EREG, FSH also increased the expression of genes coding for key transcription factors (CEBPB, FOS, ID1/3, and NR5A2), which may contribute to the differing expression profiles of FSH- and AREG/EREG-treated cumulus cells. Conclusions: The impact of FSH on cumulus cell gene transcription was higher than the impact of EGF-like factors in terms of the number of cell functions affected as well as the number of over- and underexpressed genes. Both FSH and EGF-like factors overexpressed genes involved in the post-ovulatory switch in steroidogenesis and tissue remodelling. However, FSH was remarkably more efficient in the up-regulation of several specific genes essential for ovulation of matured oocytes and also genes that been reported to play an important role in maturation of cumulus-enclosed oocytes in vitro.

DESIGN
Three different samples (FSH treated, AREG/EREG treated and control untreated cumulus cells), each represented by 3 independently prepared biological replicates were hybridized to 9 microarrays (Pigoligoarray, www.pigoligoarray.org) as follows: 1st and 3rd biological replicate: Control AlexaFluor 647 + AREG/EREG AlexaFluor 555; AREG/EREG AlexaFluor 647 + FSH AlexaFluor 555; FSH AlexaFluor 647 + Control AlexaFluor 555. 2nd biological replicate (dye swap): Control AlexaFluor 555 + AREG /EREG AlexaFluor 647; AREG/EREG AlexaFluor 555 + FSH AlexaFluor 647; FSH AlexaFluor 555 + Control AlexaFluor 647.

PLATFORM
GPL7435 Swine Protein-Annotated Oligonucleotide Microarray

CITATIONS
26445099

