TITLE
An ancient protein-DNA interaction underlying metazoan sex determination

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens ; Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Sexual reproduction is nearly universal among multicellular animals, but sex can be determined by cues including sex chromosomes, temperature, social status, and photoperiod. DMRT transcription factors are key regulators of sex in animals that use diverse sex-determining strategies. These proteins are related to the sexual regulators Doublesex (Dsx) and Male abnormal-3 (MAB-3) of insects and nematodes, respectively.  DMRT proteins share the DM DNA binding domain, comprised of a unique intertwined double zinc-binding module flanked by a C-terminal recognition helix that binds to a pseudopalindromic target DNA. Despite the central role of DMRT proteins in metazoan sexual development, how they recognize target DNA sequences is poorly understood. Here we find that DMRT proteins employ multiple DNA binding modes due to surprising versatility in how specific base contacts are made. Human DMRT1 can bind as a dimer, trimer or tetramer, in each case using paired antiparallel recognition helices that together insert into a widened DNA major groove to make base-specific contacts. Insertion of two helices in a single major groove is, to our knowledge, a DNA binding interaction unique to DMRT proteins. High resolution in vivo DNA binding analysis (ChIP-Exo) indicates that multiple DNA binding modes also are used in the mouse testis. Finally, we show that mutations affecting amino acid residues crucial for DNA recognition are associated with sex reversal in flies and also, for the first time, with male-to-female sex reversal in humans. Our results illuminate an ancient molecular interaction that underlies much of metazoan sexual development.

DESIGN
ChIP-Seq (2 samples) and Chip-Exo (1 sample) in 8 week mouse Testis, ChIP-Seq in adult Human Testis (1 sample).

PLATFORM
GPL10999 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Homo sapiens) GPL11002 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Mus musculus) GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
26005864

LIBSTRATS
:CHIP-SEQ :OTHER
