TITLE
Effect of photoperiod during late gestation on bovine mammary trancriptome

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
Cows exposed to short day photoperiod (SD, 8L:16D) during the 60-day non-lactating period prior to parturition produce more milk in their subsequent lactation compared to cows exposed to long day photoperiod (LD,16L:8D).  Although this response is well-established in dairy cows, the underlying mechanisms are not understood.  We hypothesized that differential gene expression in cows exposed to SD or LD photoperiods during the dry period could be used to identify the functional basis for the subsequent increase in milk production during lactation.  Pregnant, multiparous cows were maintained on a SD or LD photoperiod for 60-days prior to parturition.  Mammary biopsies were obtained on days -24 and -9 relative to parturition and Affymetrix GeneChip® Bovine Genome Arrays were used to quantify gene expression.  Sixty-four genes were differentially expressed (p ≤ 0.05 and fold-change ≥ |1.5|) between SD and LD treatments.  Many of these genes were associated with cell growth and proliferation, or immune function.  Ingenuity Pathway Analysis predicted upstream regulators to include TNF, TGFβ1, interferon γ and several interleukins.  In addition, expression of 125 genes was significantly different between day -24 and day -9; those genes were associated with milk component metabolism and immune function.  The interaction of photoperiod and time affected 32 genes associated with insulin-like growth factor (IGF-I) signaling.  Genes differentially expressed in response to photoperiod were associated with mammary development and immune function consistent with the enhancement of milk yield in the ensuing lactation.  Our results provide insight into the mechanisms by which photoperiod affects the mammary gland and subsequently lactation. Data were analyzed for the effect of photoperiod treatment (LD minus SD), time relative to parturition (day -24 minus day -9) and the interaction of photoperiod treatment and time ((LD minus SD day -9) minus (LD minus SD day -24))

DESIGN
Total Samples: n = 14, SD day -24 n=3, LD day -24 n=3,  SD day -9 n=4, LD day -9 n=4

PLATFORM
GPL2112 [Bovine] Affymetrix Bovine Genome Array

CITATIONS
26175502

