TITLE
Identification of differentially expressed genes related to cytoplasmic male sterility in radish (Raphanus sativus L.) by comparative transcriptome analysis

ORGANISM
Raphanus sativus

SUMMARY
Cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS), a typically maternally inherited trait, causes a failure in producing functional pollen. Although the radish CMS has be widely used to produce hybrid varieties in breeding program, the molecular mechanism of CMS in radish is poorly understood. In this study, two radish CMS lines (HYBP-A and YH-A) and their corresponding maintainer lines (HYBP-B and YH-B) were used to identify genes potentially involving in CMS using Illumina pair-end sequencing. A total of 167.86 million clean sequence reads were generated from the eight libraries (two replicates for each line). These reads were eventually assembled into 130,240 unigenes. Of them, 67,173 (51.6%) unigenes were annotated for their function. Comparison of gene expression levels between CMS line and maintainer line revealed 5,893 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in HYBP, and 3,739 DEGs inYH. There were 990 DEGs commonly identified in both HYBP and YH, with same direction of expression change in two CMS lines relative to their corresponding maintainer lines, which suggested these 990 DEGs is likely related to CMS of radish. The expression levels of 20 DEGs were further confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR). Two pathways and eight functional categories exhibited a significant enrichment with DEGs in HYBP, and one pathway and six functional categories were markedly enriched by DEGs in YH. Among these pathways/functional categories, four of them were enriched in both varieties. A series of candidate genes and pathways that may contribute to the CMS will be helpful for increasing our understanding for this trait in radish.

DESIGN
Two CMS lines and two their corresponding maintainer lines were used. a total of eight samples, i.e. two replicates for each line were used for RNA-seq.

PLATFORM
GPL19675 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Raphanus sativus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

