TITLE
The Nasal Methylome and Childhood Atopic Asthma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background:    Nasal epithelia are emerging as a proxy measure of gene expression of the airway epithelium in asthma. We hypothesized that epigenetic marks regulate gene expression of the nasal epithelia and consequently may provide a novel target for allergic asthma.   Methods:    We compared genomic DNA methylation patterns and gene expression in African American children with persistent atopic asthma [N=36] versus healthy controls [N=36].  Results were validated in an independent population of asthmatics [N=30].    Results:    We identified 186 genes with significant methylation changes, either as regions (differentially methylated regions [DMRs]) or single CpGs (differentially methylated probes [DMPs]) after adjustment for age, gender, race/ethnicity, batch effects, inflation, and multiple comparisons (false discovery rate-adjusted q < 0.05). Genes differentially methylated include those with established roles in asthma and atopy, components of the extracellular matrix, genes related to immunity, cell adhesion, epigenetic regulation, and airway obstruction. The methylation changes are large (median 9.5%, range: 2.6-29.5% methylation change) and similar in magnitude to those observed in malignancies. Hypo- and hyper-methylated genes were associated with increased and decreased gene expression respectively (P < 2.8x10-6 for DMRs and P < 7.8x10-10 for DMPs). Quantitative analysis of methylation-expression relationships in 53 differentially expressed genes demonstrated that 32 (60%) have significant (q < 0.05) methylation-expression relationships within 5kb of the gene. 10 loci selected based on the relevance to asthma, magnitude of methylation change, and asthma specific methylation-expression relationships were validated in an independent cohort of children with asthma.   Conclusions:    Our findings that epigenetic marks in respiratory epithelia are associated with allergic asthma in inner-city children provide new targets for biomarker development, and novel approaches to understanding disease pathogenesis.

DESIGN
case control design with nasal epithelial cells from 36 atopic asthmatic and 36 nonatopic nonasthmatic children from the inner city

PLATFORM
GPL13534 Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (HumanMethylation450_15017482)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

