TITLE
NF-κB activation impairs somatic cell reprogramming in ageing [IKBA-SR]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Transcriptional profiling of human Néstor-Guillermo Progeria Syndrome (NGPS) fibroblasts control, treated with sodium salicylate or transduced with Ikappa B alpha super-repressor. Somatic cell reprogramming involves rejuvenation of adult cells and relies on the ability to erase age-associated molecular marks. Accordingly, reprogramming efficiency declines with ageing, and age-associated features such as genetic instability, cell senescence or telomere shortening negatively affect this process. However, the regulatory mechanisms that constitute age-associated barriers for cell reprogramming remain largely unknown. Here, by using cells from patients with premature ageing, we demonstrate that NF-κB activation is a critical barrier for the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) in ageing. We show that NF-κB repression occurs during cell reprogramming towards a pluripotent state. Conversely, ageing-associated NF-κB hyperactivation impairs generation of iPSCs by eliciting reprogramming repressors DOT1L and YY1, reinforcing cell senescence signals and down-regulating pluripotency genes. We also show that genetic and pharmacological NF-κB inhibitory strategies significantly increase the reprogramming efficiency of fibroblasts from Néstor-Guillermo Progeria Syndrome (NGPS) and Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS) patients, as well as from normal aged donors. Finally, we demonstrate that DOT1L inhibition in vivo ameliorates the accelerated ageing phenotype and extends lifespan in a progeroid animal model. Collectively, our results provide evidence for a novel role of NF-κB in the control of cell fate transitions and reinforce the interest of studying age-associated molecular impairments to implement cell reprogramming methodologies, and to identify new targets of rejuvenation strategies.

DESIGN
Human NGPS fibroblasts were treated with sodium salicylate, transduced with Ikappa B alpha super-repressor or left untreated. RNA was extracted and transcriptional profiling was obtained with GeneChip Human Gene 2.0 ST Arrays.

