TITLE
Genome-wide localization of ORC and MCM binding sites and identification of replication origins in S. pombe

ORGANISM
Schizosaccharomyces pombe

SUMMARY
DNA replication of eukaryotic chromosomes initiates at a number of discrete loci, called replication origins.  Distribution and regulation of origins are important for complete duplication of the genome.  Here, we determined locations of Orc1 and Mcm6, components of pre-replicative complex (pre-RC), on whole genome of Schizosaccharomyces pombe using a high-resolution tiling array.  Pre-RC sites were identified in 460 intergenic regions, where Orc1 and Mcm6 colocalized.  By mapping of 5-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU)-incorporated DNA in the presence of hydroxyurea (HU), 307 pre-RC sites were identified as early-firing origins.  In contrast, 153 pre-RC sites without BrdU incorporation were considered to be late and/or inefficient origins.  Early and late origins tend to distribute separately in large chromosome regions.  Inactivation of replication checkpoint by deletion of Cds1 resulted in BrdU incorporation with HU specifically at the late origins.  An origin-exchange experiment showed that replication timing was not intrinsic to origin but dependent on its surrounding region.  Interestingly, pericentromeric heterochromatin and the silent mating type locus replicated in the presence of HU, while the inner centromere or subtelomeric heterochromatin did not.  Notably, MCM did not bind to inner centromeres where ORC was located.  Thus, replication is differentially regulated in chromosome domains. Keywords: ChIP-chip analysis

DESIGN
Experiment Design: •	The goal of the experiment – Genome-wide localization of ORC and MCM binding sites and identification of replication origins in Shizosaccaromyces pombe •	A brief description of the experiment (e.g., the abstract from the related publication) DNA replication of eukaryotic chromosomes initiates at a number of discrete loci, called replication origins.  Distribution and regulation of origins are important for complete duplication of the genome.  Here, we determined locations of Orc1 and Mcm6, components of pre-replicative complex (pre-RC), on whole genome of Schizosaccharomyces pombe using a high-resolution tiling array.  Pre-RC sites were identified in 460 intergenic regions, where Orc1 and Mcm6 colocalized.  By mapping of 5-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU)-incorporated DNA in the presence of hydroxyurea (HU), 307 pre-RC sites were identified as early-firing origins.  In contrast, 153 pre-RC sites without BrdU incorporation were considered to be late and/or inefficient origins.  Early and late origins tend to distribute separately in large chromosome regions.  Inactivation of replication checkpoint by deletion of Cds1 resulted in BrdU incorporation with HU specifically at the late origins.  An origin-exchange experiment showed that replication timing was not intrinsic to origin but dependent on its surrounding region.  Interestingly, pericentromeric heterochromatin and the silent mating type locus replicated in the presence of HU, while the inner centromere or subtelomeric heterochromatin did not.  Notably, MCM did not bind to inner centromeres where ORC was located.  Thus, replication is differentially regulated in chromosome domains. •	Keywords, for example, time course, cell type comparison, array CGH (the use of MGED ontology terms is recommended). Mitosis, Cell cycle, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Whole-genome, Tiling array, Chromosome II, III array, Orc1, Orc4, Mcm6, BrdU-labeling, cds1Δ. •	Experimental factors Distribution of the Orc1 and Mcm6 in WT in G1 phase (S. pombe). Distribution of the Orc4 in WT in asynchronous cells (S. pombe). Distribution of BrdU-incorporated DNA in WT and in cds1 deletion mutant in S phase in the presence of HU (S. pombe). •	Experimental design ChIP analysis: In all cases, hybridization data for ChIP fraction was compared with WCE (whole cell extract) fraction. Pombe whole-genome tiling array were used. BrdU analysis: Hybridization data for BrdU fraction (replicated DNA) was compared with Whole fraction (unreplicated DNA) or hybridization data for BrdU fraction of cds1Δ cells was compared with that of WT cells. Pombe whole-genome tiling array were used. •	Quality control steps taken Different subunits of the same complex. Confirmation of several loci by q-PCR. Checking the BrdU-labeled DNA fraction in CsCl gradient by q-PCR or slot-blot analysis. •	Links to the publication, any supplemental websites or database accession numbers. GSE6523 Samples used, extract preparation and labelling: •	The origin of each biological sample ChIP analysis: Schizosaccharomyces pombe nda3-KM311 cdc10-129 strain harboring pREP81-cdc18 and pREP42-cdt1. BrdU analysis: Schizosaccharomyces pombe wild type (cdc25-22 nmt1-TK) and cds1Δ strains. •	Manipulation of biological samples and protocols used ChIP analysis: Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) in G1 arrested cells or asynchronous cells were performed as previously described (Takahashi et al., 2003, EMBO). Hybridization to Affimetrix high-density oligonucleotide array of S. pombe chromosomes 2 and 3 and whole genome tiling array of S. pombe was performed essentially as previously described (Katou et al., 2003, nature) (Lengronne et al., 2004, nature). BrdU analysis: Growing cdc25-22 cells expressing Thymidine Kinase were arrested at G2/M boundary and released in the presence of BrdU and HU. BrdU was incorporated in nascent DNA in following S phase. The genomic DNA was digested by HaeIII and BrdU-labeled DNA was purified in CsCl density gradient centrifugation. Hybridization to Affimetrix high-density oligonucleotide array of S. pombe whole genome tiling array was performed essentially as previously described (Katou et al., 2003, nature) (Lengronne et al., 2004, nature).

PLATFORM
GPL3847 Affymetrix S. pombe Tiling 1.0FR Array

CITATIONS
17304213

