TITLE
Study of Bacillus cereus spore germination and outgrowth in a vegetable food model by means of genome-wide transcriptome analysis

ORGANISM
Bacillus cereus

SUMMARY
Pathogenic species belonging to Bacillus cereus sensu lato group possess a high evolutionary advantage in the environment and in food matrices thanks to their capacity to survive as silent spores to harsh environmental insults and grow at relatively low temperatures. Ready to re-heat products are at severe risk for contamination by members of Bacillus cereus s.l. group if not stored at proper conditions. In this work, the goal was to assess, by means of a genome-wide transcriptional assay, the isolated strain Bacillus cereus UC10070 gene expression behind the process of spore germination and consequent outgrowth in an artificially contaminated vegetable-based food model. A vegetable food model subjected to a heat treatment was determined to present favourable conditions for spores germination. Microscopic analyses together with OD measurements were applied to select the key steps of B. cereus cell cycle to be used for the microarray analysis. Using this approach we found a total of 1,646 probe sets differentially expressed and modulated during the entire B. cereus life cycle in the vegetable foodstuff.

DESIGN
RNA was isolated from the dormant spores (DS), germinating spores at 40 minutes (GSP), early-log phase at 2h (C2h) and late log phase cells at 12 hours (C12h) after thermal treatment of B. cereus UC10070 previously isolated froma biofilm on a spoiled vegetable-based puree. There were 3 biological replicates (independent cultures) for each condition. Complete genome sequence of B. thuringiensis sv konkukian str. 97-27 (NCBI Reference Sequence: NC_005957.1) was chosen for its high homology with B. cereus s.l. UC10070, to design probes corresponding to 5,197 genes spotted in duplicates onto ElectraSenseH 12K microarrays chip.

PLATFORM
GPL19697 Combimatrix B. thuringiensis sv konkukian str. 97-27 4.5k array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

