TITLE
Radiation dose-rate effects on gene expression for human biodosimetry

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: The effects of dose-rate and its implications on radiation biodosimetry methods are not well studied in the context of large-scale radiological scenarios. There are significant health risks to individuals exposed to an acute dose in such an event, but the most realistic scenario would be a combination of exposure to both high and low dose-rates, from both external and internal radioactivity. It is important therefore, to understand the biological response to prolonged exposure; and further, discover biomarkers that can be used to estimate the extent of damage from low-dose rate exposure and propose appropriate clinical treatment. Methods: We irradiated human whole blood ex vivo to three doses, 0.56 Gy, 2.25 Gy and 4.45 Gy, using two dose rates: 1.1Gy/min and 3.1mGy/min. After 24 hours, we isolated RNA from blood cells and hybridized these to Agilent Whole Human genome microarrays. We validated the microarray results using qRT-PCR. Results: Microarray results showed that there were 454 significantly differentially expressed genes after prolonged exposure to all doses. After acute exposure, 598 genes were differentially expressed to all doses combined. Gene ontology terms enriched in both sets of genes were related to immune processes and B cell mediated immunity. Genes responding to acute exposure was also enriched in functions related to natural killer cell activation and cell-to-cell signaling. As expected, p53 pathway was found to be significantly enriched at all doses and by both dose-rates of radiation. Prediction algorithms were able to distinguish between low dose-rate and acute exposures, on the basis of a group of genes. These maybe candidates for preliminary testing as markers for differences in gene expression based on dose-rate.

DESIGN
Radiation induced gene expression was measured in ex vivo irradiated human blood, at the 24hr time point after irradiation. Doses (0.56 Gy, 2.2 Gy and 4.45 Gy) were delivered by two dose rates, acute dose rate of 1Gy/min and low dose rate of 3.1 mGy/min.

PLATFORM
GPL13497 Agilent-026652 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K v2 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
25963628

