TITLE
Definition of clinically distinct molecular subtypes in estrogen receptor positive breast carcinomas using genomic grade

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Purpose: A number of microarray studies have reported distinct molecular profiles of breast cancers (BC): basal-like, ErbB2-like and two to three luminal-like subtypes. These were associated with different clinical outcomes. However, although the basal and the ErbB2 subtypes are repeatedly recognized, identification of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive subtypes has been inconsistent. Refinement of their molecular definition is therefore needed. Materials and methods: We have previously reported a gene-expression grade index (GGI) which defines histological grade based on gene expression profiles. Using this algorithm, we assigned ER-positive BC to either high or low genomic grade subgroups and compared these to previously reported ER-positive molecular classifications. As further validation, we classified 666 ER-positive samples into subtypes and assessed their clinical outcome. Results: Two ER-positive molecular subgroups (high and low genomic grade) could be defined using the GGI. Despite tracking a single biological pathway, these were highly comparable to the previously described luminal A and B classification and significantly correlated to the risk groups produced using the 21-gene recurrence score. The two subtypes were associated with statistically distinct clinical outcome in both systemically untreated and tamoxifen-treated populations. Conclusions:  The use of genomic grade can identify two clinically distinct ER-positive molecular subtypes in a simple and highly reproducible manner across multiple datasets. This study emphasizes the important role of proliferation-related genes in predicting prognosis in ER-positive BC. Keywords: disease state analysis

DESIGN
dataset of microarray experiments from primary breast tumors used to assess the reationship between GGI, molecular subtypes, and tamoxifen resistance. No replicate, no reference sample.

PLATFORM
GPL96 [HG-U133A] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A Array GPL97 [HG-U133B] Affymetrix Human Genome U133B Array GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
17401012 , 18498629 , 20479250

