TITLE
Chromothripsis in healthy individuals affects multiple protein-coding genes and can result in severe congenital abnormalities in offspring [case 3]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Chromothripsis represents an extreme class of complex chromosome rearrangements (CCRs) with major effects on chromosomal architecture. Although recent studies have associated chromothripsis with congenital abnormalities, the incidence and pathogenic effects of this phenomenon require further investigation. Here, we analyzed the genomes of three families in which chromothripsis rearrangements were transmitted from a mother to her child. The chromothripsis in the mothers resulted in completely balanced rearrangements involving 8-23 breakpoint junctions across 3-5 chromosomes. Two mothers did not show any phenotypic malformations, although 3-13 protein coding genes were affected by breakpoints. Unbalanced but stable transmission of a subset of the derivative chromosomes caused apparently de novo complex copy number changes in two children. This resulted in gene dosage changes, which are likely responsible for their severe congenital phenotypes. In contrast, one child with severe congenital disease, carried all three chromothripsis chromosomes from his healthy mother, but one of the chromosomes acquired de novo rearrangements leading to copy number changes. These results show that the human genome can tolerate extreme reshuffling of chromosomal architecture, including breakage of multiple protein coding genes, without noticeable phenotypic effects. The presence of chromothripsis in healthy individuals strongly affects reproduction and is expected to substantially increase the risk of spontaneous abortions and severe congenital disease. We analyzed one patient-parent-mother's parents quintet (case 1) and a patient-siblings-parent quintet (case 2) with Illumina beadchip arrays and one patient-parent trio (case 3)  to test for (de  novo) copy number variants and to analyze the parental origin of the complex rearrangements in these patients.

DESIGN
This study represents one child-parent trio (case 3) test for (de novo) copy number variants in the child.

PLATFORM
GPL8693 Agilent-019015 HD CGH Microarray (2X105K) Oxford design AMADID#019015 (Feature number version)

CITATIONS
25799107

