TITLE
Small ncRNA expression-profiling of blood from Hemophilia A patients identifies miR-1246 as a potential regulator of Factor 8 gene

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Hemophilia A (HA) is a bleeding disorder caused by deficiency of functional plasma clotting factor VIII (FVIII). In addition to genetic mutations in the gene encoding FVIII (F8), there is evidence that other molecular mechanisms may be involved in the pathobiology of HA. In this study, global small ncRNA expression profiling analysis of whole blood from HA patients, and controls, was performed using high-throughput ncRNA microarrays. Patients were further sub-divided into those that developed neutralizing-anti-FVIII antibodies (inhibitors) and those that did not. Selected differentially expressed ncRNAs were validated by quantitative reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis. We identified several ncRNAs, and among them, hsa-miR-1246 was significantly up-regulated in HA patients. In addition, miR-1246 showed a six-fold higher expression in HA patients without inhibitors. We have identified an miR-1246 target site in the noncoding region of F8 mRNA and were able to confirm the suppressory role of hsa-miR-1246 on F8 expression in a stable lymphoblastoid cell line expressing FVIII. These findings suggest several testable hypotheses vis-à-vis the role of nc-RNAs in the regulation of F8 expression and the development of anti-drug antibodies to FVIII infusions used to treat HA.

DESIGN
Whole blood samples from nine patients with hemophilia A and five controls were obtained. Among those patients with hemophilia A, three of them were patients who developed neutralizing-anti-FVIII antibodies (inhibitors) and the others are patients without FVIII inhibitors. RNA was isolated and purified from all samples using the RiboPure Blood Kit (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s protocol with modifications to enhance the enrichment of low molecular weight RNAs. All RNA samples were poly (A)-tailed and biotin-labeled using the FlashTag Biotin HSR RNA Labeling Kit (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA). After labeling, the enzyme linked oligosorbent assays (ELOSA) were performed to confirm that the biotin labeling processes were successful. Biotin-labeled RNA samples (500 ng/sample) were hybridized on GeneChip miRNA 3.0 microarrays (Affymetrix). Microarray data were analyzed to identify ncRNAs that were differentially expressed in hemophilia A groups compared to controls.

PLATFORM
GPL16384 [miRNA-3] Affymetrix Multispecies miRNA-3 Array

CITATIONS
26176629

