TITLE
Analysis of wildtype and Xbp1-deficient hematopoietic progenitor cell transcriptomes

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Purpose:  The goals of this study are to assess the transcriptional networks governed by the transcription factor XBP1 in lineage-uncommitted myeloid progenitors and in eosinophil-committed myeloid progenitors. Methods:  mRNA profiles of FACS-purified granulocyte-macrophage progenitors (GMPs) from XBP1 flox/flox or XBP1 flox/flox Vav1-Cre mice were generated by sequencing, in biological triplicates, using an Illumina HiSeq2000 sequencer. The Illumina HiSeq2000 sequencer was also used to obtain mRNA profiles of FACS-purified GMPs transduced with the transcription factor GATA2, resorted 36 hours post-transduction, and cultured for 48 hours, again in biological triplicates per genotype.  Sequence data from Illumina's HiSeq2000 sequencer were demuxed to generate FASTQ files for each sample using Illumina's CASAVA pipeline (version 1.8.2). The reads that passed illumina's quality/purity filter were aligned to the mouse genome (Illumina iGenomes mm9 build) using STAR aligner (version 2.3.0) with default parameters. The resulting SAM alignment files were then converted to the BAM file format, sorted and indexed using SAMtools (version 0.1.14).  Mapped reads were counted with the python module HTSeq, and differential expression analyzed with the Bioconductor package DESeq. Results and conclusions:  By monitoring XBP1-dependent transcriptional changes at different stages of eosinophil development, we demonstrated that classical XBP1-dependent networks such as glycosylation, chaperone production, and ERAD were downregulated in GMPs prior to eosinophil commitment, though there were no major defects in differentiation or survival.  However, mRNA profiling clearly demonstrated that XBP1 deficiency causes a state of cellular stress upon eosinophil commitment.  The eosinophil transcriptome was largely intact, and most dysregulated genes were associated with ER stress.  However key granule protein genes required for eosinophil development such as Prg2 and Epx were selectively downregulated only after eosinophil commitment, but not in pre-committed myeloid progenitors, and this correlated with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis predictions that GATA1 function was impaired.  This study documents the interplay between cellular stress and the ability to maintain key facets of cellular differentiation.

DESIGN
Analyses of XBP1-dependent transcriptional networks at two stages of eosinophil development.

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
26147683

