TITLE
Effects of AβPP Antisense Treatment on Hippocampal Gene Expression in Adult Mice with Memory Deficits

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of peripheral (IV) administration of AβPP antisense on hippocampal gene expression as well as on learning and memory as measured by T-maze in adult male mice aged 12 months.  The AβPP antisense treatment reversed learning and memory deficits and altered the expression of 944 hippocampal genes, which are involved in a coordinated set of signaling pathways.  Expression and pathway findings were verified at the protein and functional (phosphorylation) levels. Global differential profiling of hippocampal gene expression (12 month old adult mice:  Control, SAMP8, SAMP8 + Random antisense, SAMP8 + AβPP antisense) was performed using Affymetrix GeneChip® Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Arrays.  The AβPP antisense reversed the memory deficits and altered expression of 944 hippocampal genes. Pathway analysis showed significant gene expression changes in 9 pathways. These include the MAPK signaling pathway (P = 0.0078) and the phosphatidylinositol signaling pathway (P = 0.043), which we have previously shown to be altered in SAMP8 mice. The changes in these pathways contributed to significant changes in the Neurotropin (P = 0.0083) and Insulin Signaling (P = 0.015) pathways, which are known to be important in learning and memory.  Changes in these pathways were accompanied by phosphorylation changes in the downstream target proteins p70S6K, GSK3β, ERK, and CREB.  These changes in hippocampal gene expression and protein phosphorylation may suggest specific new targets for antisense therapy aimed at improving memory.

DESIGN
One-way ANOVA (4 conditions, n=4).  Variables were treatment (AβPP antisense, Random antisense, no treatment) and mouse strain (Control and SAMP8).  This results in 4 groups: (All 12-month-old adult male mice) NT-Control, NT_SAMP8, Random_AS-SAMP8, and AβPP_AS-SAMP8.   Each group had 4 biological replicates (4 mice).  The 'Control' mice were a 50% backcross of the SAMP8 mice with CD-1 mice (50% SAMP8 mice).  These mice were closely related to SAMP8 mice but exhibited no memory deficits at 4 or 12 months.  The SAMP8 mice had memory deficits at 12 months but not at 4 months.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

