TITLE
Paraoxonase 2 Serves a Proapopotic Function in Mouse and Human Cells in Response to the Pseudomonas aeruginosa Quorum-Sensing Molecule N-(3-oxododecanoyl)-Homoserine Lactone.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Pseudomonas aeruginosa use quorum-sensing molecules, including N-(3-oxododecanoyl)-homoserine lactone (C12), for intercellular communication. C12 activated apoptosis in mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEF) from both wild type (WT) and Bax/Bak double knock-out mice (WT MEF and DKO MEF that were responsive to C12, DKOR MEF): nuclei fragmented; mitochondrial membrane potential (∆ψmito) depolarized; Ca2+ was released from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), increasing cytosolic [Ca2+] (Cacyto); caspase 3/7 was activated. DKOR MEF had been isolated from a nonclonal pool of DKO MEF that were non-responsive to C12 (DKONR MEF). RNAseq analysis, qPCR and western blots showed that WT and DKOR MEF both expressed genes associated with cancer, including paraoxonase 2 (PON2), while DKONR MEF expressed little PON2. Adenovirus-mediated expression of human PON2 in DKONR MEF rendered them responsive to C12: ∆ψmito depolarized, Cacyto increased and caspase 3/7 activated. Human embryonic kidney 293T (HEK293T) cells expressed low levels of endogenous PON2, and these cells were also less responsive to C12. Overexpression of PON2, but not PON2-H114Q (no lactonase activity) in HEK293T cells caused them to become sensitive to C12. Because [C12] may reach high levels in biofilms in lungs of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, PON2 lactonase activity may control ∆ψmito, Ca2+ release from the ER and apoptosis in CF airway epithelia. Coupled with previous data, these results also indicate that PON2 uses its lactonase activity to prevent Bax- and Bak-dependent apoptosis in response to common proapoptotic drugs like doxorubicin, staurosporine but activates Bax- and Bak-independent apoptosis in response to C12.

DESIGN
Gene expression profiling of mouse embryo fibroblasts from WT and Bax/Bak double knock-out mice (C12 responsive and non-reponsive cell lines).

PLATFORM
GPL17021 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
25627690

