TITLE
Analysis of the molecular dialogue between gray mold (Botrytis cinerea) and grapevine (Vitis vinifera) reveals a clear shift in defense mechanisms during berry ripening

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
Mature grapevine berries at the harvesting stage (MB) are very susceptible to the gray mold fungus Botrytis cinerea while veraison berries (VB) are not. We conducted simultaneous microscopic and transcriptomic analyses of the pathogen and the host to investigate the infectious process developed by B. cinerea on MB versus VB, and the plant defense mechanisms deployed to stop the fungus development. On the pathogen side, our genome-wide transcriptomic data revealed that B. cinerea genes up-regulated during infection of MB are enriched in functional categories related to necrotrophy such as degradation of plant cell wall, proteolysis, membrane transport, reactive oxygen species generation and detoxification. Quantitative-PCR on a set of representative genes related to virulence and microscopic observations further demonstrated that the infection is also initiated on VB but stops at the penetration stage. On the plant side, genome-wide transcriptomic analysis and metabolic data revealed a defense pathways switch during berry ripening. In response to B. cinerea infection, VB activated a burst of reactive oxygen species (ROS), the salicylate (SA)-dependent defense pathway, the synthesis of the resveratrol phytoalexin and cell-wall strengthening. In opposite, infected MB activated the jasmonate (JA)-dependent pathway which does not stop the fungal necrotrophic process.

DESIGN
Grapevine berries at veraison (VB) and harvesting stages (MB) were inoculated with Botrytis cinerea B05-10 and samples were taken at 24h and 48h post-inoculation. An additional uninfected control sample taken at 0h post-inoculation was included in the experimental design. 3 replicates per sample were performed. The total-RNA samples were labeled and used for hybridization on NimbleGen 12plex Vitis vinifera gene expression array.

PLATFORM
GPL13936 NimbleGen 090918 Vitus vinifera exp HX12 [090918_Vitus_exp]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

