TITLE
Effects of Firre knockdown on mouse gene expression

ORGANISM
Mus musculus x Mus spretus

SUMMARY
In mammals, genes located on the X chromosome are present in one copy in XY males and two in XX females. To balance the dosage of X-linked gene expression between the sexes one of the two X chromosomes in females is silenced by X inactivation initiated by up-regulation of the lncRNA (long non-coding RNA) Xist and recruitment of specific chromatin modifiers for silencing. The inactivated X chromosome becomes heterochromatic and visits a specific nuclear compartment adjacent to the nucleolus. We report a novel role for the X-linked lncRNA Firre in anchoring the inactive mouse X chromosome and preserving one of its main epigenetic features, trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3). Similar to Dxz4, Firre is expressed from a macrosatellite repeat locus associated with a cluster of CTCF and cohesin binding specifically on the inactive X. CTCF binding initially present in both male and female mouse embryonic stem cells was found to be lost from the active X during development. The Firre and Dxz4 loci on the inactive X were preferentially located adjacent to the nucleolus. Knockdown of Firre RNA disrupted perinucleolar targeting and H3K27me3 levels in mouse fibroblasts, demonstrating an important role for this lncRNA in maintenance of one of the main epigenetic features of the X chromosome. There was no X-linked gene reactivation after Firre knockdown; however, a compensatory increase in the expression of chromatin modifier genes implicated in X silencing was observed. In female ES cells Firre RNA knockdown did not disrupt Xist expression/coating nor silencing of G6pdx during differentiation, suggesting that Firre does not play a role in the onset of X inactivation. We conclude that the X-linked lncRNA Firre helps position the inactive X chromosome near the nucleolus and preserve one of its main epigenetic features.

DESIGN
Examination of allelic expression in Patski cells upon Firre knockdown.

PLATFORM
GPL16617 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Mus musculus x Mus spretus)

CITATIONS
25887447

