TITLE
Transcriptome comparison between Beagle dogs and Chinese Field dogs after chronic stress exposure in the pituitary-adrenal axis

ORGANISM
Canis lupus familiaris

SUMMARY
Purpose: The transcriptome profiles were compared among groups of chronic stress exposure and control in two different breeds to identify genes and pathways related to response to chronic stress in the pituitary-adrenal axis. Methods: 6 male adult CFD and 6 Beagles were chosen at random with the similarities in good health, weight and other aspects. Separately, 3 of these two breeds were freely selected for the stress exposure via intermittent electrical stimulation and restraint stress, while the other 3 of these two breeds were non-disposed for normal control.The details for the disposal of dogs were: every morning dogs were restrained and electrical stimulations were exerted with a stable current of 10 mA for 6 s and then with a 6 s interval, lasting for 20 min every day. The duration of disposal was ten days.ll 12 dogs were killed by air embolism in the 11th day. Subsequently, pituitary and adrenal cortex tissues were fast collected and isolated for further high-sequencing. Results: 8 cDNA libraries were constructed for RNA-seq. A number of reads ranging from 53,295,978 to 65,414,932 was obtained in those 8 groups. About 10,000 genes and transcripts were annotated in each group. Besides,A total of 40, 346, 376, 69, 70, 38, 57, and 71 DEGs were detected in the contrasts of BP1_vs_BP2, CFDP1_vs_CFDP2, BP1_vs_CFDP1, BP2_vs_CFDP2, BAC1_vs_BAC2, CFDAC1_vs_CFDAC2, BAC1_vs_CFDAC1, and BAC2_vs_CFDAC2, respectively. Conclusions: Our results can contribute to a more comprehensive understanding about the genetic mechanisms of response to chronic stress in adrenal cortex and pituitary.

DESIGN
Adrenal cortex and pituitary mRNA profiles of adult Chinese Field Dog and Beagle under chronic stress exposure and normal control, including BAC1 (Beagle adrenal cortex with disposal), BAC2 (Beagle adrenal cortex with non-disposal), BP1 (Beagle pituitary with disposal), BP2 (Beagle pituitary with non-disposal), CFDAC1 (Chinese Field Dog adrenal cortex with disposal), CFDAC2 (Chinese Field Dog adrenal cortex with non-disposal), CFDP1 (Chinese Field Dog pituitary with disposal), CFDP2 (Chinese Field Dog pituitary with non-disposal), were generated by deep sequencing, using Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx.

