TITLE
Allogeneic mature human dendritic cells generate superior alloreactive regulatory T cells in the presence of  IL-15

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Introduction: Expansion of antigen (Ag)-specific natural occurring regulatory T cells (nTregs) is required to obtain sufficient numbers of cells for cellular immunotherapy. In this study, different allogeneic stimuli were studied for their capacity to generate functional alloAg-specific nTregs. Methods: A highly enriched nTreg-fraction (CD4+CD25brightCD127- T cells) was alloAg-specific expanded using HLA-mismatched immature, mature monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDC) or peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). The allogeneic mature moDC-expanded nTregs were fully characterized by analysis of the demethylation status within the TSDR of the FOXP3 gene and the expression of both protein and mRNA of FOXP3, HELIOS, CTLA4 and cytokines. In addition, the antigen-specific suppressive capacity of these expanded nTregs was tested. Results: Allogeneic mature moDC and skin-derived DC were superior in inducing nTreg-expansion compared to immature moDC or PBMC in an HLA-DR and CD80/CD86-dependent way. Remarkably, the presence of exogenous IL-15 without IL-2, could facilitate optimal mature moDC-induced nTreg-expansion. Allogeneic mature moDC-expanded nTregs were at low ratios ( < 1:320), potent suppressors of alloAg-induced proliferation without significant suppression of completely HLA-mismatched-Ag-induced proliferation. Mature moDC-expanded nTregs were highly demethylated at the TSDR within the FOXP3 gene and highly expressed of FOXP3, HELIOS and CTLA4.  A minority of the expanded nTregs produced IL-10, IL-2, IFN-g and TNF-a but very few IL-17 producing nTregs were found. Next generation sequencing of mRNA of moDC-expanded nTregs revealed a strong induction of Treg-associated mRNAs. Conclusions: Human allogeneic mature moDC are highly efficient stimulator cells, in presence of exogenous IL-15, for expansion of stable alloAg-specific nTregs with superior suppressive function.

DESIGN
Four different batches of highly pure regulatory T cells (all from the same donor) were expanded in two different ways, and compared to non-expanded samples.

