TITLE
Gene expression of M. acetivorans producing ANME-1 Mcr during growth on methane vs. growth on methanol

ORGANISM
Methanosarcina acetivorans

SUMMARY
Our goal is to convert methane efficiently into liquid fuels that may be more readily transported. Since aerobic oxidation of methane is less efficient, we focused on anaerobic processes to capture methane, which are accomplished by anaerobic methanotrophic archaea (ANME) in consortia. However, no pure culture capable of oxidizing and growing on methane anaerobically has been isolated. In this study, Methanosarcina acetivorans, an archaeal methanogen, was metabolically engineered to take up methane, rather than to generate it. To capture methane, we cloned the DNA coding for the enzyme methyl-coenzyme M reductase (Mcr) from an unculturable archaeal organism from a Black Sea mat into M. acetivorans to effectively run methanogenesis in reverse. The engineered strain produces primarily acetate, and our results demonstrate that pure cultures can grow anaerobically on methane.

DESIGN
Differential gene analysis of two growth conditions (three biological replicates each) was performed: (i) M. acetivorans/pES1-MATmcr3 grown on methane and (ii) M. acetivorans/pES1-MATmcr3 grown on methanol. All starter cultures (200 mL) were grown on methanol for 5 days, and harvested by centrifugation. Cell pellets were washed three times with HS medium, and resuspended using 5 mL HS medium, 2 µg/mL puromycin, and 0.1 mM FeCl3. For condition (i), methane was filled into the headspace of the cultures. For condition (ii), 150 mM methanol was added. All cultures were incubated at 37C for 5 days, followed by rapid centrifugation in the presence of 50 µL RNAlater solution (Ambion, Austin, TX) per mL of culture. Total RNA was isolated using RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) were then digested with terminator 5’-phosphate-dependent exonuclease (Epicentre, Madison, WI) to partially remove ribosomal RNA. Digested RNA were cleaned up using AgenCourt RNAClean XP beads (AgenCourt Bioscience, Beverly, MA) and used for cDNA library construction using the TruSeq Stranded mRNA Library kit (Illumina). Pooled and barcoded cDNA library was then sequenced on a HiSeq sequencing platform (Illumina). Obtained reads were mapped to the reference genome of M. acetivorans (Genbank accession NC_003552.1) using STAR. The mapped reads were assembled using Cufflink v2.2.1 to identify potential novel transcripts. Assembled, unannotated novel transcripts for all the strains were combined with the list of known genes. Differential expression of genes and potential novel transcripts were determined using Cuffdiff at a significance cutoff at q < 0.07 with a false discovery rate of 0.05. Expression levels of gene transcripts are expressed as fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped fragments (FPKM), and expression changes are determined by the ratio of FPKM of culture replicates grown on methane to FPKM of culture replicates grown on methanol.

PLATFORM
GPL19842 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Methanosarcina acetivorans)

CITATIONS
26767617

