TITLE
Mutational blows to Sox2+ cells induce epithelial squamous tumor initiation

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Cancer originates as the progressive accumulation of genetic mutations in proto-oncogenes and tumor suppressors. However, the early events underlying tumor initiation remain largely elusive, mostly due to the general lack of information regarding the cells-of-origin responsible for tumor formation as well as the precise impacts of genetic insults on tumor initiation in vivo. Here, we demonstrate that Sox2-positive (Sox2+) adult stem cells are responsible for epithelial squamous tumor formation. Conditional expression of oncogenic Kras (KrasG12D) and knockout of p53 (also known as Trp53) in Sox2+ cells quickly and specifically resulted in the formation of squamous tumors in the forestomach and esophagus. GFP-based lineage tracing experiments demonstrated that Sox2+ cells are the cells-of-origin of squamous tumors in the esophagus and forestomach. Of note, our data showed that p53 deletion alone did not suffice for tumor initiation. On the contrary, tumor initiation was observed upon KrasG12D activation whereas p53 deletion further contributed to the malignancy of the generated tumors, pointing out distinct roles for Kras activation and p53 deletion in squamous tumor formation and progression, to which a multihit carcinogenesis model can be applied. Global gene expression analysis revealed secreting factors upregulated in the generated tumors induced by oncogenic Kras, which contribute to tumor progression. Taken together, these results demonstrate that epithelial squamous tumors can specifically originate as a consequence of defined genetic mutations in a Sox2+ cell population and highlight the connections between proliferative stem cells and tumor development in vivo.

DESIGN
Expression profiling of mouse tissues with genetically induced tumors by RNA-Seq

PLATFORM
GPL17021 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

