TITLE
The effect of lovastatin and fenofibrate in a short term diet-induced hyperlipidemia model in mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
C57BL/6 mice were fed ad libitum for the first 5 days of the experiments with high fat high cholesterol (HFC) diet only. The next 7 days of the experiments mice were continuously fed on a HFC diet and simultaneously vehicle (control group), fenofibrate (100 mg/kg) or lovastatin (30 mg/kg) were orally daily administered. At the end of the experiment (day 12) fenofibrate and lovastatin significantly decreased plasma LDL levels, while plasma cholesterol levels were significantly decreased by lovastatin only. Gene expression analysis of hyperlipidemic mouse liver revealed 391 significantly modulated genes when compared to standard diet fed mice. KEGG pathways related to modulated genes were identified and the most significant were biosynthesis of steroids, metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome P450 and linoleic acid metabolism. These pathways were modulated in a way, which increased the clearance of lipids and decreased endogenous synthesis of fatty acids and cholesterol. Additionally, genes involved in the regulation of detoxification pathways were significantly upregulated. The hepatic gene expression profiles of fenofibrate and lovastatin-treated HFC diet fed mice were compared to the vehicle-treated HFC diet fed mice. In the fenofibrate-treated group 124 genes and in the lovastatin-treated group 38 genes were significantly modulated. In the fenofibrate-treated group the top three significantly modulated pathways are fatty acid metabolism, propanoate metabolism and ascorbate and aldarate metabolism. While in the lovastatin-treated group the top three significantly modulated pathways are glycosphingolipid biosynthesis, tyrosine metabolism and metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome P450. Expert based classification revealed that both fenofibrate an lovastatin significantly down-regulated genes encoding sterol-C4-methyl oxidase like and 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase. Additionally, the regulation of cholesterol at the transcriptional level was also significantly augmented by fenofibrate and lovastatin, as judged by increased expression of  -1 and decreased expression of INSIG-2. Keywords: Drug treatment

DESIGN
24 seven week old mice were randomly divided in four experimental groups. Control group (n = 6) was fed on a standard chow diet (diet 3430, Provimi Kliba AG, Kaiseraugst, Switzerland) and treated orally once daily with vehicle for 12 days. Remaining 18 mice were fed on HFC diet for 12 days. On day five HFC diet fed mice were treated orally once daily either with vehicle (HFC group, n=6), lovastatin (HFC lovastatin group, 30mg/kg, n=6) or fenofibrate (HFC fenofibrate group, 100mg/kg, n=6). Doses of lovastatin and fenofibrate were choosen according to the literature review. On day 12 liver were excised and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for the subsequent transriptome analyses

PLATFORM
GPL2881 Agilent-013326 Mouse Oligo Microarray (V2) G4121B (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

