TITLE
Transcriptomic changes in the plant pathogenic fungus Rhizoctonia solani AG-3 in response to the antagonistic bacterial Serratia proteamaculans and Serratia plymuthica

ORGANISM
Rhizoctonia solani AG-3 Rhs1AP

SUMMARY
Improved understanding of bacterial-fungal interactions in the rhizosphere should assist in the successful application of bacteria as biological control agents against fungal pathogens of plants, providing alternatives to chemicals in sustainable agriculture. To understand the functional response of the fungal phytopathogen Rhizoctonia solani to different bacteria and to elucidate whether the molecular mechanisms that the fungus exploits involve general stress or more specific responses, we performed a global transcriptome profiling of R. solani Rhs1AP anastomosis group 3 (AG-3) during interaction with the S4 and AS13 species of Serratia using RNA-seq. Transcriptome analysis revealed that approximately 10% of the fungal transcriptome was differentially expressed during challenge with Serratia. The numbers of S4- and AS13-specific differentially expressed genes (DEG) were 866 and 292 respectively, while there were 1035 common DEGs in the two treatment groups. Four hundred and sixty and 242 genes respectively had fold values exceeding 8x and for further analyses this cut-off value was used. Functional classification of DEGs revealed a general shift in fungal gene expression in which genes related to xenobiotic degradation, toxin and antioxidant production, energy, carbohydrate and lipid metabolism and hyphal rearrangements were subjected to transcriptional regulation. In conclusion, it was found out that most genes were regulated in the same way in the presence of both bacterial isolates, but there were also some strain-specific responses. The findings in this study will be beneficial for further research on biological control and in depth exploration of bacterial-fungal interactions in the rhizosphere.

DESIGN
Transcriptome profiling of fungal hyphae from treatments challenged with the bacteria and from control treatments containing only the fungus were generated by deep sequencing, in triplicate, by using Illumina® TruSeq.

