TITLE
Molecular pathogenetic study of Fusarium head blight in highly resistant, resistant and susceptible common wheat (Triticum aestivum L.)

ORGANISM
Triticum aestivum

SUMMARY
Fusarium graminearum (F.g) is responsible for Fusarium head blight (FHB), which is a destructive disease of wheat that accumulates mycotoxin such as deoxynivalenol (DON) and makes its quality unsuitable for end use. Several FHB resistant varieties development is going on world-wide. However the complete understanding of wheat defence response, pathogen (Fusarium graminearum) disease development mechanism and the gene crosstalk between organisms is still unclear.  In our study focused to analyse pathogen (F. graminearum) molecular action in different Fusarium head blight resistance cultivars during the disease development. To understand the Fusarium graminearum pathogen molecular reaction, microarray gene expression analysis was carried out by using Fusarium graminearum (8 x 15k) Agilent arrays at two time points (3 & 7 days after infection) on three wheat genotypes (Japanese landrace cv. Nobeokabouzu-komugi - highly resistant, Chinese cv. Sumai 3 - resistant and Australian cv. Gamenya - susceptible), which spikes infected by Fusarium graminearum ‘H-3’strain. During the disease development the pathogen biomass as well as the expression of Trichothecene biosynthesis involved genes (Tri genes) in three wheat cultivars was determined. In our material no relation between fungus biomass and the disease symptoms were observed, however, it showed relation with fungus virulence factors expression (Tri genes).   For the first time, we report the nature of Fusarium graminearum gene expression in the FHB-highly resistant cv. Nobeokabouzu-komugi during the disease development stage and the possible underlying molecular response.

DESIGN
F. graminearum inoculated (3 and 7 days after inoculation) and water inoculated Mock samples were used for cRNA synthesis and further hybridization with 3 biological replications. Total 12 samples per genotype

PLATFORM
GPL19869 Agilent-038658 F. graminearum_8x15k

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

