TITLE
Transcriptome analyses show changes in gene expression to accompany pollen germination and tube growth in Arabidopsis

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Pollen germination, along with pollen tube growth, is an essential process for the reproduction of flowering plants.  The germinating pollen with tip-growth characteristics provides an ideal model system for the study of cell growth and morphogenesis.  As an essential step towards a detailed understanding of this important process, the objective of this study was to comprehensively analyze the transcriptome changes during pollen germination and pollen tube growth.  Using Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Arrays, this study is the first to show the changes in the transcriptome from desiccated mature pollen grains to hydrated pollen grains and then to pollen tubes of Arabidopsis thaliana.  The number of expressed genes, either for total expressed genes or for specifically expressed genes, increased significantly from desiccated mature pollen to hydrated pollen and again to growing pollen tubes, which is consistent with the finding that pollen germination and tube growth was significantly inhibited in vitro by a transcriptional inhibitor.  The results of GO analyses showed that expression of genes related to cell rescue, transcription, signal transduction and cellular transport were significantly changed, especially for up-regulation, during pollen germination and tube growth, respectively.  In particular, genes of the CaM/CML, CHX and Hsp families showed the most significant changes during pollen germination and tube growth.  These results demonstrate that the overall transcription of genes, both in the number of expressed genes and in the levels of transcription, was increased.  Furthermore, the appearance of many novel transcripts during pollen germination as well as tube growth indicates that these newly expressed genes may function in this complex process.

DESIGN
Three samples are analyzed in this experiment.  They are desiccated mature pollen grains (MP), hydrated pollen grains (HP) and growing pollen tubes (PT) of Arabidopsis thaliana, respectively.  Each sample has two biological replicates, so that there are 6 data sets of ATH1 array in this experiment.

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
18775970

