TITLE
A small RNA controlled AND-gate regulates extrachromosomal DNA transfer in Salmonella

ORGANISM
Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium str. SL1344

SUMMARY
Horizontal gene transfer via plasmid conjugation is a major driving force in microbial evolution. Transfer of conjugative plasmids is a complex process that needs to be synchronized with the physiological state of the bacterial host. While several host transcription factors are known to control the plasmid-borne transfer control genes, RNA-based regulatory circuits for host-plasmid communication remain unknown. Here, we describe a post-transcriptional mechanism whereby the Hfq-dependent small RNA, RprA, inhibits transfer of pSLT, the virulence plasmid of Salmonella enterica. RprA employs two different seed pairing domains to recognize and activate the mRNAs of both the sigma-factor S and RicI, a cytoplasmic membrane protein. The latter is a hitherto unknown conjugation inhibitor whose transcription requires S. Together, RprA and S constitute a feed-forward loop with AND-gate logic which tightly controls RicI synthesis for selective suppression of plasmid conjugation under membrane stress. This study reports the first sRNA-controlled feed-forward loop based on double target activation and an unexpected function for a core-genome encoded small RNA in controlling extrachromosomal DNA transfer.

DESIGN
To determine the targets of the small regulatory RNAs RprA/RprA-proc. in S. Typhimurium, we looked at the effect of a short pulse of RprA/RprA-proc. over-expression on the Salmonella transcriptome. To achieve over-expression, the rprA/rprA proc. genes were cloned in the pBAD plasmid and induced with 0.2% L-arabinose for 10 min. We then extracted the total RNA for transcriptional profiling. A strain carrying the pBAD plasmid w/o insert was used as negative control (also induced by L-arabinose). 3 biological replicates were performed. This sRNA target identification strategy has been described in Papenfort et al; Molecular Microbiology (2006) 62(6), 1674–1688.

PLATFORM
GPL5780 IFR_Salmonella_7.3k_v1.0

CITATIONS
26307765

