TITLE
Low- and middle-dose of radiation on hNPC and HUVEC

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Many neural progenitor cells present in the fetus, but also in adult brain, which play a major role for the reproduction for healingin regeneration of neuronal cells, when differentiated cells are damaged. However, effects of radiation effect on undifferentiated neural progenitor cells remained unclear. The radiation doses of medical exposure, pollution by nuclear power plant accidents, and other exposure of workers; medical workers, airline crews, and astronaut have been focused. In this study, we report the effects of low- to middle- dose doses of radiation on cultured human neural progenitor cells (hNPC) differentiated derived from embryonic stem (ES) cells, which are partially compared with those of human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC). Gene expression was changed by continuous exposure of 31mGy; 0.0072 mGy/ minute, 124mGy; 0.029 mGy/ minute and 496mGy; 0.085 mGy/ minute for seventy-two hours. While shortening in neurite length by 124mGy was not significant, its decrease was observed by 496 mGy of radiation. Number of altered pathways increased dose-dependently. By thirty-one mGy per 72 hours of radiation, gene expression of inflammatory pathways involving interferon and cell junction were changed. By 124 mGy of radiation, DNA double strand break repair pathways and cell adhesion molecules were affected. Then, 496 mGy of radiation for 72 hours altered translational DNA synthesis pathway, apoptotic pathway, various metabolic pathways and neural differentiation pathways. Dose-dependent transcriptional changes by low- to middle- radiation are consistent with gradual axonal shortening, growth arrest and neural cell death.

DESIGN
Undifferentiated hNPC derived from embryonic stem (ES) cells and HUVECs synchronized in G1 cell cycle phase were irradiated from sealed cesium-137 for 72 h.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
26795421

