TITLE
Bioinformatics Analysis of the Permanent Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion (PMCAO) Mouse Model Brain Regions Gene Profiles for Unraveling Progression of the Ischemic Core

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (PMCAO) mouse model has been established and used by our group with a focus on systematically investigating effects of the neuropeptide pituitary adenylate-cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP38) on the ischemic brain. Using an intracerebroventrically PACAP38 (1 pmol) injection over a control saline (0.9% sodium chloride, NaCl) treatment, we have been successful in generating a vast inventory of gene expression data in both whole hemispheres and specific brain regions of infract/ischemic core (IC) and penumbra (P) with high-throughput Agilent whole genome 4 × 44 K oligo DNA microarray chips. In this study, we first perform a specific analysis of the gene expression in the IC and P compared to the healthy control regions to know the gene profile status of the progression of the IC. We will use this data together with generated biological function and network analysis from our previous studies, and present new insight into the potential mechanism behind PACAP38 neuroprotective function in the ischemic brain.

DESIGN
Three mice each in PMCAO groups for ischemic core and penumbra regions in ischemic brain over corresponding controls were used, respectively, that exhibited neurological grades G1 and G2 for the subsequent downstream analysis. Ischemic core and penumbra regions and corresponding healthy core and penumbra were carefully removed with a sterile scalpel, and placed in 2 ml Eppendorf tubes. Samples were then quickly immersed in liquid nitrogen and stored in -80 ºC prior to further analysis. Whole genome DNA microarray analysis was performed on a 4x44K, Agilent DNA Microarray chip.

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

