TITLE
Expression profiles of peripheral blood monocytes in periodontal therapy

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Periodontal infections have been associated with systemic inflammation and risk for atherosclerosis and vascular disease. We investigated the effects of comprehensive periodontal therapy on gene expression of peripheral blood monocytes. Approximately 1/3 of the patients showed substantial changes in expression in genes relevant to innate immunity, apoptosis, and cell signaling. We concluded that periodontal therapy may alter monocytic gene expression in a manner consistent with a systemic anti-inflammatory effect. Keywords: time course,disease state analysis

DESIGN
Fifteen patients with periodontitis contributed with blood samples at four time points: 1 week prior to periodontal treatment (#1), at treatment initiation (baseline, #2), 6 weeks (#3) and 10 weeks post-baseline (#4). At baseline and 10 weeks, periodontal status was recorded and subgingival plaque samples were collected and processed by checkerboard DNA-DNA hybridization. Periodontal therapy, including periodontal surgery and extractions but no adjunctive antibiotics, was completed within 6 weeks. At each of the four time points, serum concentrations of 19 biomarkers were determined using multiplex assays for Luminex technology. Peripheral blood monocytes were purified, RNA was extracted, reverse-transcribed, labeled, and hybridized with Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 chips. Expression profiles were analyzed using linear random effects models. Further analysis of Gene Ontology (GO) terms summarized the expression patterns into biologically relevant categories. Treatment resulted in substantial improvement in clinical periodontal status and reduction in levels of several periodontal pathogens. Expression profiling over time revealed more than 11,000 probes sets differentially expressed at a false discovery rate of < 0.05.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
17716309

