TITLE
Dissection of the style’s response to pollination using transcriptome profiling in self-compatible (Solanum pimpinellifolium) and self-incompatible (Solanum chilense) tomato species

ORGANISM
Solanum chilense ; Solanum pimpinellifolium

SUMMARY
Background: Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) self-compatibility (SC) is defined as self-pollen tubes that can penetrate their own stigma, elongate in the style and fertilize their own ovules. Self-incompatibility (SI) is defined as self-pollen tubes that are prevented from developing in the style. To determine the influence of gene expression on style self-pollination, a transcriptome-wide comparative analysis of SC and SI tomato unpollinated/pollinated styles was performed using RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) data. Results: Transcriptome profiles of 24-h unpollination (UP) and self-pollination (P) styles from SC and SI tomato species were generated using high-throughput next generation sequencing. From the comparison of SC self-pollinated and unpollinated styles, 1341 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified, of which 753 were downregulated and 588 were upregulated. From the comparison of SI self-pollinated and unpollinated styles, 804 DEGs were identified, of which 215 were downregulated and 589 were upregulated. Nine gene ontology (GO) terms were enriched significantly in SC and 78 GO terms were enriched significantly in SI. A total of 105 enriched Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways were identified in SC and 80 enriched KEGG pathways were identified in SI, among which “Cysteine and methionine metabolism pathway” and “Plant hormone signal transduction pathway” were significantly enriched in SI. Conclusions: This study is the first global transcriptome-wide comparative analysis of SC and SI tomato unpollinated/pollinated styles. Advanced bioinformatic analysis of DEGs uncovered the pathways of “Cysteine and methionine metabolism” and “Plant hormone signal transduction”, which are likely to play important roles in the control of pollen tubes growth in SI species.

DESIGN
24-h unpollination (UP) and self-pollination (P) styles mRNA profiles from SC and SI tomato species were generated by deep sequencing, in triplicate, using Illumina Hiseq 2500 platform.

PLATFORM
GPL20002 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Solanum pimpinellifolium) GPL20003 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Solanum chilense)

CITATIONS
25976872

