TITLE
Effects of Arid1a knockout in murine ovarian endometrioid carcinomas with biallelic inactivation of Apc and Pten

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
We mated mice with floxed alleles of both Apc and Pten, to mice with floxed alleles for Arid1a, to obtain female mice with both copies of all three genes floxed.  At 7 to 8 weeks of age the right ovarian bursal cavites of the mice were injected with 50 million plaque-forming units of adenovirus expressing Cre recombinase, which causes the floxed genes to be knocked out.  Tumor tissue from 3 mice for each group was obtained at necropsy, RNA purified, and targets for Affymetrix arrays synthesized from the mRNAs.  We used Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays, which hold 45101 probe-sets.  Raw data was processed with Robust Multi-array Average algorithm (RMA).  Data is log2-transformed transcript abundance estimates. We performed T-tests to compare the 3 vs 3 arrays.  We supply a supplementary excel workbook that holds the same data as the data matrix file, but also holds the probe-set annotation at the time we analyzed the data, and some very simple statistical calculations, which select subsets of the probe-sets as differentially expressed.  Consumers should consider obtaining more up-to-date probe-set annotation for the array platform. We have also supplied a second supplementary tar archive holding software and files to 1) perform permutation testing of the probe-set selection in order to estimate false discovery rates for the probe-sets we selected as differentially expressed, 2) perform enrichment testing of GO terms, and 3) to perform enrichment testing of KEGG pathways and 3000 curated gene sets from version 4 of the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB). The software is in " C " .

DESIGN
Ovarian endometrioid carcinoma samples from 3 female mice with conditional knockout of Apc and Pten, were compared to similar tumors from 3 female mice with conditional knockout of Apc, Pten, and Arid1a.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
26279473

