TITLE
Escherichia coli facing ionic silver stress: correlation between the genetic, physiological and biochemical responses

ORGANISM
Escherichia coli str. K-12 substr. MG1655

SUMMARY
The present work was devoted to a multi-level characterization of E. coli exposed to Ag+-mediated stress using for the first time an approach of integrative biology, based on the combination of physiological, biochemical and transcriptomic data sets. Bacterial growth and survival after Ag+ exposure were first quantified and related to the accumulation of intracellular silver, as detected by Nano Secondary Ion Mass Spectroscopy (NanoSIMS) at high lateral resolution. The whole transcriptomic response of E. coli cells under ionic silver-mediated stress was then characterized. Clear correlations were established between (i) cell physiology, (ii) variations in the biochemical characteristics of cell fatty acids and proteins, and (iii) regulation of gene expression. This challenging approach allowed determining key genetic markers of the E. coli response to ionic silver. In particular, we identified Ag+-mediated regulations of gene expression in correlation with growth (e.g. genes of transporters, transcriptional regulators, ribosomal proteins), necessary for ionic silver transport and detoxification (e.g. copA, cueO, mgtA, nhaR) and to cope with various stress (dnaK, pspA, metA,R, oxidoreductase genes). Regulation of gene expression after Ag+ exposure was also correlated to macromolecular modifications, such as acyl chain length (e.g. fadL, lpxA, arnA), protein secondary structure (e.g. dnaJ, htpX, degP) and cell morphology (e.g. ycfS, ycbB).

DESIGN
A microarray study using total RNA recovered at 3h during separate cultures of Escherichia coli MG1655 subjected to 0, 5.0, 6.5 and 8.5 µM AgNO3. Three independent repetitions were performed for each condition of 0, 5.0, 6.5 and 8.5 µM AgNO3. Each array measures the expression level of 4,254 genes from Escherichia coli MG1655 with eight 60-mer probes per gene in duplicates.

PLATFORM
GPL14649 NimbleGen E. coli K12 Gene Expression Array [071112_Ecoli_K12_EXP]

CITATIONS
26696268

