TITLE
The effect of dietary soybeans and their isoflavone content on the expression profiles of mRNAs in liver of rats

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Soyfoods have been drawn the interrest in the roles that reducing risk of cardiovascular disease. Among various components, isoflavones have been come to the attention as beneficial soy ingredients. To evaluate the effectiveness of isoflavone content in dietary soybean (Glycine max) on modulating lipid metabolism, hepatic gene expressions involved in lipid metabolism were analyzed in rats. An isoflavone-rich cultivar (Yukipirika) and a conventional cultivar (Fukuyutaka) were employed. A principal component analysis (PCA) of microarray data was used to summarize characteristics of the experimental groups. As a result, the characteristics of the diets were largely explained by the first principal component (PC1). Soybean content in the diets distinctly separated in PC1. In contrast, isoflavone content had little effect on the mRNA expression. The GeneChip data was normalized and summarized by using SuperNORM data service (Skylight Biotech Inc.). Significance of expressional change among groups was tested by 2-way ANOVA on the normalized CEL data, which was deposited in a tab-separated ASCII text format. Principal components were identified on the summarized gene data.

DESIGN
Male Splague-Dawley rats were randomly divided into 4 groups and fed an experimental diet for 21 days. The experimental diets were as follows: a diet containing 200 g/kg casein (Cas, n=7); a diet containing two proteins derived equally from casein and Fukuyutaka (conventional cultiver soybean) (F10, n=7); a diet containing two proteins derived from casein and Yukipirika (high-isoflavone soybean) in the proportion of three parts to one (Y05, n=7); a diet containing two proteins derived equally from casein and Yukipirika (Y10, n=8). In each of the groups, five rats with average food intake were used for microarray analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL1355 [Rat230_2] Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
18328687

