TITLE
CTCF and CohesinSA-1 Mark Active Promoters and Boundaries of Repressive Chromatin Domains in Primary Human Erythroid Cells [ChIP-Seq]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
CTCF and cohesinSA-1 are regulatory proteins involved in a number of critical cellular processes including transcription, maintenance of chromatin domain architecture, and insulator function. To assess changes in the CTCF and cohesinSA-1 interactomes during erythropoiesis, chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with high throughput sequencing and mRNA transcriptome analyses via RNA-seq were performed in primary human HSPC hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPC) and primary human erythroid cells from single donors. Sites of CTCF and cohesinSA-1 co-occupancy were enriched in gene promoters in HSPC and erythroid cells compared to single CTCF or cohesin sites. Cell type-specific CTCF sites in erythroid cells were linked to highly expressed genes, with the opposite pattern observed in HSPCs. Chromatin domains were identified by ChIP-seq with antibodies against trimethylated lysine 27 histone 3, a modification associated with repressive chromatin. Repressive chromatin domains increased in both number and size during hematopoiesis, with many more repressive domains in erythroid cells than HSPCs. CTCF and cohesinSA-1 marked the boundaries of these repressive chromatin domains in a cell-type specific manner. These genomic data support the hypothesis that CTCF and cohesinSA-1 have multiple roles in the regulation of gene expression during erythropoiesis including transcriptional regulation at gene promoters and maintenance of chromatin architecture.

DESIGN
CD34+-selected stem and progenitor cells were expanded for three days in the absence of EPO. The cells were further cultured in the presence of EPO, and formaldehyde crosslinked chromatin was isolated after cells differentiated into R3/R4 nucleated erythroid cells. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (chIP-seq) was performed using antibodies against CTCF, Cohesin SA1 and H3K27me3, along with a total input control. Two replicates for CTCF and Cohesin SA1 were obtained.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
27219007

