TITLE
The transcriptome of murine foetal skin and scarless wound healing

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Foetal skin is known to heal without scar. This ability is lost in the third trimester of gestation. In mouse, scarless wound healing was reported until the day 15-16 of gestation. A range of factors that could explain the mechanisms of scarless skin wound healing have been identified, to mention reduced immune response, a greater proportion of collagen type III, hyaluronic acid and transforming growth factor beta isoform 3.  The involvement of epigenetic changes, which are known to determine developmental processes, has not been examined in the context of scarless foetal skin healing so far.   We performed the microarray analysis methylome and transcriptome of murine foetal dorsal skin at embryonic day 15 contrasted with those in later phases at embryonic days 18-19 as well as the in the adult mouse. The group of genes which show decreased methylation status in the foetal skin before the loss of ability to scarless healing between embryonic day 15 and 18 are enriched with transcriptional factors involved in embryonic morphogenesis, epithelium development, neuron differentiation, and synapse functions. The genes with increased methylation after the transition are associated with cell death and epithelial cell differentiation, inflammatory and wounding response and the degradation of hyaluronic acid. A substantial part of DNA methylation differences observed between embryonic day 15 and 18 were retained later at embryonic day 19 and in adults and remarkably correlated with gene expression changes. A major part of genes encoding the key factors responsible for cutaneous wound healing show significant changes in gene expression following  the transition  from scar free to normal healing.    The results show that skin methylome and transcriptome undergoe extensive alterations following the loss of ability to scarless healing, while the functions associated with the changes imply their central role in skin wound repair.

DESIGN
5 samples, each sample is a pool representing three animals

PLATFORM
GPL10192 NimbleGen Mus musculus MM9 Expression Array (12x135k)

CITATIONS
27510554

