TITLE
Gene expression analysis in tamoxifen resistant ER+ breast cancer cell lines

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
To elucidate the molecular mechanisms of tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer, we performed gene array analysis and identified 366 genes with altered expression in four unique tamoxifen resistant (TamR) cell lines vs the parental tamoxifen sensitive MCF7/S0.5 cell line. Most of these genes were funcationally linked to cell proliferation, death and control gene expression, and include FYN, PRKCA, ITPR1, DPYD, DACH1, LYN, GBP1 and PRLR. Treatment with FYN specific small interfering RNA or a SRC family kinase inhibitor reduced cell growth of TamR cell lines while exerting no significant effect on MCF7/S0.5 cells. Moreover, overexpression of FYN in parental tamoxifen-sensitive MCF7/S0.5 cells resulted in reduced sensitivity to tamoxifen, demonstrating growth and survival promoting function of FYN in MCF7 cells. FYN knockdown in TamR cells led to reduced phosphorylation of 14-3-3 and CDc 25A, suggesting that FYN, by activation of of important cell cycle-associated proteins, may overcome the anti-proliferative effects of tamoxifen. Evaluation of the subcellular localization of FYN in primary breast tumors from two cohorts of endocrine-treated ER+ breast cancer patients, one with advanced disease (N = 47) and the other with early disease (N = 76), showed that in the former, plasma membrane-associated FYN expression strongly correlated with longer progression-free survival (P < 0.0002). Similarly, in early breast cancer patients, membrane-associated expression of FYN in the primary breast tumor was significantly associated with increased metastasis-free (P < 0.04) and overall (P < 0.004) survival independent of tumor size, grade or lymph node status. Our results indicate that FYN has an important role in tamoxifen resistance, and its subcellular localization in breast tumor cells may be an important novel biomarker of response to endocrine therapy in breast cancer.

DESIGN
The array included four TamR MCF7/S0.5 cell lines TamR1, TamR4, TamR7 and TamR8 and one tamoxifen sensitive MCF7/S0.5. Three biological replicates of TamR1 and TamR4 as well as 2 biological replicates of TamR7 and TamR8 was used in the study. The tamoxifen sensitive parental MCF7/S0.5 was represented by 8 biological replicates in the array.

