TITLE
Comparison of cultured chondrocytes from knee and proximal interphalangeal joints

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Osteoarthritis (OA) of the hand is a common disease resulting in pain and impaired function.  The pathogenesis of hand OA (HOA) is elusive and models to study it have not been described so far. Culture of chondrocytes is a model to study the development of cartilage degeneration, which is a hallmark of OA and well established in OA of the knee and hip. In the current study we investigated the feasibility human chondrocyte culture derived from proximal interphalangeal (PIP) finger joints of dissecting room cadavers. Index and middle fingers without signs of osteoarthritis were obtained from 30 cadavers using two different protocols.  Hyaline cartilage from both articulating surfaces of the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint was harvested and digested in collagenase. Cultured chondrocytes were monitored for contamination, viability, and expression of chondrocyte specific genes. Chondrocytes derived from knee joints of the cadavers were cultured under identical conditions. Gene expression comparing chondrocytes from PIP and knee joints was carried out using Affymetrix GeneChip Human 2.0 ST arrays. The resulting differentially expressed genes were validated by real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry.Chondrocytes harvested up to 101 hours after death of the donors were viable. mRNA expression of collagen 2A1, aggrecan and Sox9 was significantly higher in chondrocytes as compared to cultured fibroblasts.  Comparison of gene expression by chondrocytes from PIP and knee joints yielded 528 differentially expressed genes. Chondrocytes from the same joint region had a higher grade of similarity than chondrocytes of the same individual. These results were validated using real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry.We demonstrate for the first time a reliable method for culture of chondrocytes derived from PIP joints. PIP chondrocytes show a specific gene expression pattern and could be used as tool to study cartilage degeneration in HOA.

DESIGN
Three samples of cultured chondrocytes from knee and proximal interphalangeal finger joints were compared. Gene expression of the four most differentially regulated genes was confirmed by real-time PCR in 10 independent samples.

