TITLE
Trancriptional profiling of rat liver after short-term (up tp 14 days) administration of carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic chemicals

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
The carcinogenic potential of chemicals is currently evaluated with rodent life-time bioassays, which are time consuming, and expensive with respect to cost, number of animals and amount of compound required. Since the results of these 2-year bioassays are not known until quite late during development of new chemical entities, and since the short-term test battery to test for genotoxicity, a characteristic of genotoxic carcinogens, is hampered by low specificity, the identification of early biomarkers for carcinogenicity would be a big step forward. Using gene expression profiles from the livers of rats treated up to 14 days with genotoxic and non-genotoxic carcinogens we previously identified characteristic gene expression profiles for these two groups of carcinogens. We have now added expression profiles from further hepatocarcinogens and from non-carcinogens the latter serving as control profiles. We used these profiles to extract biomarkers discriminating genotoxic from non-genotoxic carcinogens and to calculate classifiers based on the support vector machine (SVM) algorithm. These classifiers then predicted a set of independent validation compound profiles with up to 88% accuracy, depending on the marker gene set. We would like to present this study as proof of the concept that a classification of carcinogens based on short-term studies may be feasible.

DESIGN
Male Wistar rats were treated by oral gavage with the nongenotoxic hepatocarcinogens, genotoxic carcinogens and non-hepatocarcinogens. Depending on the administered compound, rats were treated daily for 1, 3, 7, or 14 days and livers were taken 1 day each after the last treatment for histopathological evaluation. From the five animals per treatment group three animals were selected based on the histopathological findings and subjected to molecular profiling using Affymetrix RG-230A arrays.

