TITLE
Massively parallel cis-regulatory analysis in the mammalian central nervous system

ORGANISM
Mus musculus ; Synthetic plasmid

SUMMARY
Cis-regulatory elements (CREs, e.g., promoters and enhancers) regulate gene expression, and variants within CREs can modulate disease risk. Next-generation sequencing has enabled the rapid generation of genomic data that predict the locations of CREs, but a bottleneck lies in functionally interpreting these data. To address this issue, massively parallel reporter assays (MPRAs) have emerged, in which barcoded reporter libraries are introduced into cells and the resulting barcoded transcripts are quantified by next-generation sequencing. Thus far, MPRAs have been largely restricted to assaying short CREs in a limited repertoire of cultured cell types. Here, we present two advances that extend the biological relevance and applicability of MPRAs. First, we adapt exome capture technology to instead capture candidate CREs, thereby tiling across the targeted regions and markedly increasing the length of candidate CREs that can be readily assayed. Second, we package the library into adeno-associated virus (AAV), thereby allowing delivery of candidate CREs to target organs in vivo. As a proof-of-concept, we introduce a capture library of ~46,000 constructs, corresponding to ~3,500 DNase I hypersensitive (DHS) sites, into the mouse retina by ex vivo plasmid electroporation and into the mouse cerebral cortex by in vivo AAV injection. We demonstrate tissue-specific cis-regulatory activity of DHSs and provide examples of high-resolution truncation mutation analysis for multiplex parsing of CREs. Our approach should enable massively parallel functional analysis of a wide range of CREs in any organ or species that can be infected by AAV, such as non-human primates and human stem cell-derived organoids.

DESIGN
MiSeq (2x250bp) paired-end sequencing was conducted to determine the barcode-CRE correspondence of the library. HiSeq (1x50bp) sequencing was conducted to quantify the RNA and DNA barcode abundance in retina and cortex.

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus) GPL20106 Illumina MiSeq (Synthetic plasmid)

CITATIONS
26576614

