TITLE
Chromatin environment shapes replication origin organization and defines origin classes

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
To unveil the still-elusive nature of metazoan replication origins, we identified them genome-wide and at unprecedented high-resolution in mouse ES cells. This allowed initiation sites (IS) and initiation zones (IZ) to be differentiated. We then characterized their genetic signatures and organization and integrated these data with 43 chromatin marks and factors.  Our results reveal that replication origins can be grouped into three main classes with distinct organization, chromatin environment and sequence motifs. Class 1 contains relatively isolated, low-efficiency origins that are poor in epigenetic marks and are enriched in an asymmetric AC repeat at the initiation site.  Late origins are mainly found in this class. Class 2 origins are particularly rich in enhancer elements. Class 3 origins are the most efficient and are associated with open chromatin and polycomb protein-enriched regions. The presence of Origin G-rich Repeated elements (OGRE) potentially forming G-quadruplexes (G4) was confirmed at most origins. These coincide with nucleosome-depleted regions located upstream of the initiation sites, which are associated with a labile nucleosomes containing H3K64ac. These data demonstrate that specific chromatin landscapes and combinations of specific signatures regulate origin localization. They explain the frequently-observed links between DNA replication and transcription. They also emphasize the plasticity of metazoan replication origins, and suggest that in multicellular eukaryotes, the combination of distinct genetic features and chromatin configurations act in synergy to define and adapt the origin profile.

DESIGN
Examination of replication origins by high-throughput sequencing in mouse stem cells. The Series supplementary files Combination_3replicates.wig, Initiation_Sites.bedGraph, and Initiation_Zones.bed contain combined data from the 3 replicates (GSM1668878, GSM1668879, GSM1668880).

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
26560631

LIBSTRATS
:CHIP-SEQ
