TITLE
Efficacy of retinoids in IKZF1-mutated BCR-ABL1 acute lymphoblastic leukemia

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Alterations of IKZF1, encoding the lymphoid transcription factor IKAROS, are a hallmark of high risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), however the role of IKZF1 alterations in ALL pathogenesis is poorly understood. Here we show that in mouse models of BCR-ABL1 leukemia, Ikzf1 and Arf alterations synergistically promote the development of an aggressive lymphoid leukemia. Ikzf1 alterations were associated with acquisition of stem cell-like features, including self-renewal and increased bone marrow stromal adhesion. Rexinoid receptor agonists reversed this phenotype, in part by inducing expression of IKZF1, resulting in abrogation of adhesion and self-renewal, cell cycle arrest and attenuation of proliferation without direct cytotoxicity. Retinoids potentiated the activity of dasatinib in mouse and human BCR-ABL1 ALL, providing a new therapeutic option in IKZF1-mutated ALL. Significance: The outcome of therapy for high-risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia remains suboptimal despite contemporary chemotherapy and the advent of targeted therapeutic approaches. Recent genomic studies have identified deletions or mutations of IKZF1 as a hallmark of high-risk ALL, but an understanding of how IKZF1 alteration contribute to leukemia development are lacking. Here we show that IKZF1 alterations drive lymphoid lineage, a stem cell-like phenotype, abnormal bone marrow adhesion, and poor responsiveness to tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy. Using a high-content screen, we show that retinoids reverse this phenotype in part by inducing expression of wild type IKZF1, and increase responsiveness to TKIs. These findings provide new insight into the pathogenesis of high-risk ALL and potential new therapeutic approaches.

DESIGN
Pre-B mRNA profiles of p185 MIG and IK6 cells, DMSO or drug treated, in 3 or 4 replicates, using Illumina HiSeq 2500.

PLATFORM
GPL17021 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
26321221

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
