TITLE
Discovery and profiling of small RNAs responsive to stress conditions in the plant pathogen Pectobacterium atrosepticum

ORGANISM
Pectobacterium atrosepticum SCRI1043

SUMMARY
Small RNAs (sRNAs) have emerged as important regulatory molecules and have been studied in several bacteria. However, to date, there have been no whole-transcriptome studies on sRNAs in any of the Soft Rot Enterobacteriaceae (SRE) group of pathogens. Although the main ecological niches for these pathogens are plants, a significant part of their life cycle is undertaken outside their host within the adverse soil environment. However, the mechanisms of SRE adaptation to this harsh nutrient-deficient environment are poorly understood. In the study reported herein, by using strand-specific RNA-seq analysis and in silico sRNA predictions, we describe the sRNA pool of Pectobacterium atrosepticum and reveal numerous sRNA candidates, including those that are induced during starvation-activated stress response. Consequently, strand-specific RNA-seq enabled detection of 137 sRNAs and sRNA candidates under starvation conditions; 25 of these sRNAs were predicted for this bacterium in silico. Functional annotations were computationally assigned to 68 sRNAs. The expression of sRNAs in P. atrosepticum was compared under growth-promoting and starvation conditions: 63 sRNAs were differentially expressed with 57 sRNAs up-regulated under nutrient-deficient conditions. Conservation analysis using BLAST (e-value < 0.001) showed that most of the identified sRNAs are conserved within the SRE. Subsequently, we identified 9 novel sRNAs within the P. atrosepticum genome. A large number of these sRNAs is starvation-induced, suggesting their role in bacterial adaptive response. Finally, this work provides a basis for future experimental characterization and validation of sRNAs in plant pathogens.

DESIGN
sRNA profiles from P. atrosepticum SCRI1043 cells existing under growth-promoting and starvation conditions were generated using Strand-specific RNA sequencing

PLATFORM
GPL20147 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Pectobacterium atrosepticum SCRI1043)

CITATIONS
26753530

