TITLE
Comparative analysis of extremely thermophilic Caldicellulosiruptor species reveals common and differentiating cellular strategies for plant biomass utilization

ORGANISM
Caldicellulosiruptor bescii

SUMMARY
Microbiological, genomic and transcriptomic analyses were used to examine three species from the bacterial genus Caldicellulosiruptor with respect to their capacity to convert the carbohydrate content of lignocellulosic biomass at 70°C to simple sugars, acetate, lactate, CO2 and H2.  C. bescii, C. kronotskyensis and C. saccharolyticus solubilized 38%, 36% and 29% (by weight) of unpretreated switchgrass (5 g/l), repectively, which was about half of the concentration of crystalline cellulose (Avicel, 5 g/l) that was solubilized under the same conditions. The lower yields with C. saccharolyticus were unexpected, given that its genome encodes the same GH9-GH48 multi-domain cellulase (CelA) found in the other two species. However, the genome of C. saccharolyticus lacks two other cellulases with GH48 domains, which could be responsible for its lower levels of solubilization. Transcriptomes for growth of each species comparing Cellulose to switchgrass showed that many carbohydrate ABC transporters and multi-domain extracellular glycoside hydrolases were differentially regulated, reflecting the heterogeneity of lignocellulose. However, significant differences in transcription levels for conserved genes among the three species were noted, indicating unexpectedly diverse regulatory strategies for deconstruction for these closely related bacteria. Genes encoding the Che-type chemotaxis system and flagella biosynthesis were up-regulated in C. kronotskyensis and C. bescii during growth on cellulose, implicating motility in substrate utilization. The results here show that capacity for plant biomass deconstruction varies across Caldicellulosiruptor species and depends in a complex way on GH genome inventory, substrate composition, and gene regulation.

DESIGN
A dye swap was completed with each of three Caldicellulosiruptor species: C. bescii, C. kronotskyensis and C. saccharolyticus growing on cellulose and switchgrass. Half of the RNA sample for one condition was labeled with Cy3 and the other half Cy5. The two differentially labeled samples were run on two different slides and analyzed to investigate differences in transcription during growth on cellulose and switchgrass.

