TITLE
miRNA expression studies in uveal melanoma (South Asian-Indian population).

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
To predict differentially expressed miRNAs between monosomy 3 and disomy 3, and to associate these miRNAs with the clinico-pathological parameters in South Asian Indian population with uveal melanoma (UM). The study consists of six uveal melanoma primary tumour tissues of South Asian-Indian population. These six tumours have been screened for chromosome 3 aberration using Chromogenic in-situ hybridisation (CISH). Thus, sample under the study includes, three each of monosomy 3 and disomy 3. The miRNA profiling was carried out from the tumor sections of formalin-fixed paraffin embedded eyeball samples. miRNA expression profile was obtained in monosomy 3 and disomy 3  samples, analysed by unsupervised analysis (Principal Component Analysis) and supervised analysis (Significance analysis of microarray). The select up-regulated and candidate miRNAs associated with monosomy 3 uveal melanoma tumors were validated further with qRT-PCR (n=86). Thus, this study indicates the role of miRNAs in UM tumor progression and their implication in predetermining the liver metastasis.

DESIGN
The study consists of six uveal melanoma  primary tumour tissues of South Asian-Indian population. These six tumours have been screened for chromosome 3 abberation using chromogenic in-situ hybridisation (CISH). Thus, samples under the study includes three each of  monosomy 3 and disomy 3. The miRNA profiling were carried out from the tumor sections of  formalin-fixed paraffin embedded eyeball samples. The up-regulated miRNAs associated with monosomy 3 uveal melanoma tumors were short listed and the candidate miRNAs were validated further with qRT-PCR. Agilent one-color experiment, Organism: Homo sapiens, Agilent Human miRNA 8x15k Arrays AMADID: 021827 [Agilent miRNA labeling reagent and Hybridization Kit Cat # 5190-0408]

PLATFORM
GPL11487 Agilent-021827 Human miRNA Microarray [miRNA_107_Sep09_2_105]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

