TITLE
Tissue Contaminants and Associated Transcriptional Response in Trout Liver from High Elevation Lakes of Washington

ORGANISM
Oncorhynchus mykiss ; Oncorhynchus clarkii

SUMMARY
The consistent cold temperatures and large amount of precipitation in the Olympic and Cascade ranges of Washington State are thought to increase atmospheric deposition of contaminants in these high elevation locations. Total mercury and 28 organochlorine compounds were measured in composite, whole fish samples collected from 14 remote lakes in the Olympic, Mt. Rainer, and North Cascades National Parks.  Mercury was detected in fish from all lakes sampled and ranged in concentration from 17 to 262 ug/kg wet weight. Only two organochlorines, total polychlorinated biphenyls (tPCB) and dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (DDE), were detected in fish tissues (concentrations < 25 ug/kg wet weight).  No organochlorines were detected in sediments (MRL ≈1-5 ug/kg), while median total and methyl mercury in sediments were 30.4 and 0.34 ug/kg (dry weight), respectively.  Using a targeted  rainbow trout cDNA microarray with known genes, we detected significant differences in liver transcriptional responses, including metabolic, endocrine, and immune-related genes, in fish collected from a contaminated lake compared to a lake with a lower contaminant load.  Overall, our results suggest that local urban areas are contributing to the observed contaminant patterns, while the transcriptional changes point to a biological response associated with exposure to these contaminants in fish. Specifically, the gene expression pattern leads us to hypothesize a role for mercury in disrupting the metabolic and reproductive pathways in fish from high elevation lakes in western Washington. Keywords: High altitude lakes, mercury, salmonids, organochlorines

DESIGN
Overall, 5 independent samples from Wilcox lake and 3 independent samples from Skymo lake were used for microarray. All the 8 samples were cross hybridized using reference RNA obtained from Rainbow trout liver samples. Dye-swapping was also followed.

PLATFORM
GPL3713 UWVJLAB RT 150 v.1.0

CITATIONS
17948813

