TITLE
Disruption of mitochondrion-to-nucleus interaction in deceased cloned piglets

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
Most animals produced by somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) are heteroplasmic for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA).  Oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) in clones therefore requires the coordinated expression of genes encoded by the nuclear DNA and the two sources of mitochondria.  Such interaction is rarely studied because most clones are generated using slaughterhouse oocytes of unrecorded origin.  Here we traced the maternal lineages of seven diseased and five one-month-old live cloned piglets by sequencing their mtDNA (short SNP information in single mitochondrial gene).  Additionally by using a 13K oligonucleotide microarray, we compared the expression profiles of nuclear and mtDNA-encoded genes that are involved in mitochondrial functions and regulation between the cloned groups and their age-matched controls (n=5 per group).  We found that the oocytes used to generate the cloned piglets were of either the Large White or Duroc background, and oocyte genetic background was not related to the clones’ survival.  Expression profiles of mtDNA-encoded genes in clones and controls showed intermixed clustering patterns without treatment or maternal lineage-dependency.  In contract, clones and controls clustered separately for their global and nuclear DNA-encoded mitochondrial genes in the lungs for both the deceased and live groups.  Functional annotation of differentially expressed genes encoded by both nuclear and mtDNA revealed abnormal gene expression in the mitochondrial OXPHOS pathway in deceased clones.  Among the nine differentially expressed genes of the OXPHOS pathway, seven were down-regulated in deceased clones compared to controls, suggesting deficiencies in mitochondrial functions.  Together, these data demonstrate that the coordination of expression of mitochondrial genes encoded by nuclear and mtDNA is disrupted in the lung of diseased clones.

DESIGN
Two-condition experiment, Clones vs. age-matched controls, Biological replicates: 5 control replicates, 5-7 clone replicates, Technical replicates: dye-swap (10 control replicates, 10-14 clone replicates in total per age)

PLATFORM
GPL20201 Qiagen porcine array-ready oligo set

CITATIONS
26067091

