TITLE
Mevalonate pathway antagonist inhibits proliferation of serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma and ovarian carcinoma in mouse models.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Statins are among the most frequently prescribed drugs because  of their efficacy and low toxicity in treating hypercholesterolemia.  Recently, statins have been reported to inhibit the proliferative activity  of cancer cells, especially those with *TP53* mutations. Since *TP53*  mutations occur in almost all of the ovarian high-grade serous carcinoma, we determined if statins suppressed tumor growth in animal models of  ovarian cancer. Two ovarian cancer mouse models were employed. The first one was a genetically engineered model, mogp-TAg, in which the  promoter of oviduct glycoprotein-1 was used to drive the expression of SV40 T-antigen in gynecologic tissues. These mice spontaneously develop serous  tubal intraepithelial carcinomas (STICs), which are known as ovarian cancer  precursor lesions. The second model was a xenograft tumor model in which human ovarian cancer cells were inoculated into immunocompromised mice.  Mice in both models were treated with lovastatin, and effects on tumor  growth were monitored. The molecular mechanisms underlying the anti-tumor  effects of lovastatin were also investigated. Lovastatin significantly reduced the development of STICs in  mogp-TAg mice and inhibited ovarian tumor growth in the mouse xenograft  model. Knockdown of prenylation enzymes in the mevalonate pathway  recapitulated the lovastatin-induced anti-proliferative phenotype.  Transcriptome analysis indicated that lovastatin affected the expression of  genes associated with DNA replication, Rho/PLC signaling, glycolysis, and  cholesterol biosynthesis pathways, suggesting that statins have pleiotropic  effects on tumor cells. The above results suggest that repurposing statin drugs for  ovarian cancer may provide a promising strategy to prevent and manage this devastating disease.

DESIGN
SKOV3 and OVCAR5 cells were treated with either 10uM Lovastatin or DMSO for 48 hours before harvested for gene expression array.

