TITLE
Changes in polysome association of mRNA throughout growth and development in Arabidopsis thaliana (Polysome association)

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Translational control is a key regulatory step in the expression of genes as proteins. In plant cells, translational efficiency of mRNAs differs on different mRNA species, and the efficiency dynamically changes in various conditions. To gain a global view of translational control throughout growth and development, we performed genome-wide analysis of polysome association of mRNA over growth and leaf development in Arabidopsis thaliana by applying the mRNAs in polysome to DNA microarray. This analysis revealed that the degree of polysome association of mRNA had different levels depending on mRNA species, and the polysome association changed greatly throughout growth and development for each. In the growth stage, transcripts showed varying changes in polysome association from strongly depressed to unchanged degree, with the majority of transcripts showing dissociation from ribosomes. On the other hand, during leaf development, the polysome association of transcripts showed a normal distribution from repressed to activated mRNAs when comparing between expanding and expanded leaves. In addition, functional category analysis of the microarray data suggested that translational control has a physiological significance in plant growth and development process, especially in category of signaling and protein synthesis. Besides this, we compared changes in polysome association of mRNAs between various conditions and characterized translational controls in each. This result suggested that mRNAs translation might be controlled by complicated mechanisms for response to each condition. Our results highlight the importance of dynamic changes in mRNA translation in plant development and growth.

DESIGN
Experiment using two-flactionated mRNA in 4 developmental stages, Polysomal mRNA vs. total mRNA.  Biological replicates: 2. Compared 2DAG and 21DAG, or Young leaves and Mature leaves.

