TITLE
Expression data of sleeping, waking, and sleep deprived adult heterozygous aldh1l1 – eGFP-L10a mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Transcriptomic studies revealed that hundreds of mRNAs show differential expression in the brains of sleeping versus awake rats, mice, flies, and sparrows. Although these results have offered clues regarding the molecular consequences of sleep and sleep loss, their functional significance thus far has been limited. This is because  the previous studies pooled transcripts from all brain cells, including neurons and glia. In the following experiment, we studied the specific effects of sleep and wake conditions on glia cells of mouse cerebral cortex using the genetically targeted translating ribosome affinity purification (TRAP) methodology. We used bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) transgenic mice expressing EGFP tagged ribosomal protein L10a in astrocytes which constitute a defined cellular population of the mouse brain. Using this approach, we could extract only the astrocytic mRNAs, and only those already committed to be translated into proteins (L10a is part of the translational machinery).

DESIGN
Six mice for each vigilant state group (sleep (S), waking (W), and sleep deprivation (SD)) were considered. For each animal, cerebral cortex was dissected and immediately processed. Samples were immunoprecipitated to isolate astrocytes. The precipitated portion formed the bound sample (IP) containing astrocytes and the remaining part formed the unbound sample (UB) containing all the remaining cell types (neurons and other glia cells). Then, both IP and UB samples were processed and RNA was extracted. All the IP samples (n=18) were then hybridized to  Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays, while UB samples were pooled together in two biological replicates (UB1+UB2+UB3 and UB4+UB5+UB6) for each group (n=6 in total) and then hybridized to  Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
26413480

