TITLE
7SK-BAF axis controls pervasive transcription at enhancers [ChIP-Seq]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Eukaryotic genomes are extensively transcribed, but unfettered transcription alters gene expression and leads to genome damage by several means. Divergent transcription occurs at active enhancers and promoters, distinct classes of cis-regulatory elements critical for precise control of gene expression. A key step in RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) transcription is promoter-proximal pausing, which occurs bidirectionally ~25-60 nucleotides downstream of transcription start sites (TSS). Promoter-proximal pause release is gated by the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb)-7SK snRNA pathway; release from 7SK allows P-TEFb phosphorylation of Pol II and subsequent elongation. The 7SK small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) is thought to reside in the nucleoplasm, but it has been suggested that 7SK could operate physically on chromatin. Notably, while enhancer transcription is one of the earliest steps of gene activation12 and some enhancer RNAs (eRNAs) participate in gene regulation, far less is known about the control of eRNA transcription. Here we show that 7SK inhibits enhancer transcription by modulating nucleosome position. 7SK occupies enhancers and super enhancers genome-wide, and 7SK is required to limit eRNA initiation and synthesis in a manner distinct from promoter pausing. Clustered elements at super enhancers uniquely require 7SK to prevent convergent transcription of colliding polymerases. 7SK inhibits enhancer transcription by modulating chromatin structure, physically interacts with the BAF chromatin remodeling complex, and is required to recruit BAF to enhancers. Thus, 7SK employs distinct mechanisms to counteract diverse consequences of pervasive transcription that distinguish super enhancers, enhancers, and promoters

DESIGN
Each experiment was performed in at least biological duplicate with input or other controls when appropriate.

PLATFORM
GPL19057 Illumina NextSeq 500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
26878240

