TITLE
The distinct response of gd T cells to the Nod2 agonist muramyl dipeptide

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
We have begun to approach gd T cells more as prospective innate cells than as conventional T cells.  Recent results indicated that purified gd T cells are primed directly in response to pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) to better respond to secondary signals and increase expression of chemokine and activation-related genes.  In microarray and real time PCR analyses of RNA derived from bovine and human gd T cells, transcripts encoding Nod2 were repeatedly amplified.  Nod2 is the intracellular receptor for muramyl dipeptide (MDP), a subunit of PGN, functions in regulating innate activities, and was thought to be expressed primarily in APCs.  Given our repeated detection of Nod2 transcripts in gd T cells, the specific direct response of gd T cells to MDP was analyzed by microarray, real time PCR, proteome array and in a functional priming assay.  The results indicate a subtle activation in response to MDP akin to priming, and suggest a unique mechanism for differential gene expression. Keywords: Comparison of genes expressed after stimulation of bovine gd T cells with either PBS or MDP

DESIGN
PBLs from calf 129 were stained with GD3.8 directly conjugated to FITC, washed, and sorted on a Vantage SE cell sorter (BD Immunocytometry Systems) as previously described.  PBLs from calves 150 and 151 were stained with GD3.8, and anti-Mouse IgG magnetic beads and sorted with MACS magnetic bead system (Miltenyi Biotec) as previously described to a purity of > 98%.  Sorted cells were rested overnight, stimulated for 4 hours then lysed in Buffer RLT and genomic DNA sheared using Qiashredder columns then frozen at -80oC.  RNA was extracted following the manufacturer’s protocol for RNeasy (Qiagen) column purification, assessed on a Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies), and amplified using the Affymetrix One-cycle protocol with approximately 1.7micrograms of total RNA as described in the GeneChip® Expression Analysis Technical Manual (June 2004).  Hybridizations to Genechip® Bovine Genome Arrays (Affymetrix) were performed with 15 mg biotin labeled cRNA.  Washing and staining was performed in the GeneChip® Fluidics Station 450 using the Midi_euk2v3 protocol.  Chip scans were performed on the Affymetrix GeneChip® Scanner 3000.  GeneChip® Operating Software (GCOS v.1.1, Affymetrix) 19;20 was used for data collection.

PLATFORM
GPL2112 [Bovine] Affymetrix Bovine Genome Array

CITATIONS
19306993

