TITLE
Angiogenesis inhibitors ameliorates inflammatory infiltrate, fibrosis and portal pressure in cirrhotic rats

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Background and aims: There are considerable evidences demonstrating that angiogenesis and chronic inflammation are mutually dependent. However, although cirrhosis progression is characterized with a chronic hepatic inflammatory process, this connection is not sufficiently explored as a therapeutic strategy. Therefore, this study was aimed to assess the potential benefits of targeting angiogenesis in cirrhotic livers to modulate inflammation and fibrosis. For this purpose, we evaluate the therapeutic utility of angiogenesis inhibitors. Methods: The in vivo effects of angiogenesis inhibitors were monitored in liver of cirrhotic rats by measuring angiogenesis, inflammatory infiltrate, fibrosis, a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) accumulation, differential gene expression (by microarrays), and portal pressure. Results: Cirrhosis progression was associated with a significant enhancement of vascular density and expression of vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A), angiopoietin-1, angiopoietin-2 and placental growth factor (PlGF) in cirrhotic livers. The newly formed hepatic vasculature expressed vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1). Interestingly, the expression of these adhesion molecules correlated well with local inflammatory infiltrate. Livers of cirrhotic rats treated with angiogenesis inhibitors presented a significant decrease in hepatic vascular density, inflammatory infiltrate, a-SMA abundance, collagen expression and portal pressure. Conclusion: Angiogenesis inhibitors may offer a potential novel therapy for cirrhosis due to its multiple mechanisms of action against angiogenesis, inflammation and fibrosis in cirrhotic livers. Keywords: angiogenesis, cirrhosis, liver, Affymetrix, fibrosis

DESIGN
RNA from liver of 4 non-treated cirrhotic rats or 4 rats treated with angiogenesis inhibitors was hybridized to 8 high-density oligonucleotide microarray (Rat2302, Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA)

PLATFORM
GPL1355 [Rat230_2] Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
17935226

