TITLE
Developmental regulation of piRNAs during spermatogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
The piRNA pathway is studied in great detail in Drosophila female germline. In this study we show that unlike the female germline where all Piwi proteins are expressed throughout oogenesis, Ago3 - a Piwi family protein shows a spatial expression male germline. To understand dynamics of piRNA pathway during spermatogonia and primary spermatocyte stages of male germline development, we used arrest mutants. The bag of marbles (bam) and benign gonial cell neoplasm (bgcn) mutants have only early mitotic dividing germline cells in the testes due to failure to progress to primary spermatocyte stage, the cannonball (can) and spermatocyte arrest (sa) mutant germline cells cannot progress beyond primary spermatocyte stage. To investigate the dynamics of the piRNA pathway during spermatogenesis in spermatogonia and primary spermatocyte stages, we used testicular tissues from these stage-specific arrested mutants. While we used entire bam and bgcn mutant testes for spermatogonia purification, we while we manually removed the apical regions of can and sa mutant testes to exclude mitotically dividing undifferentiated germline cells for primary spermatocytes purification. Our results show that piRNAs mapping to transposons are more abundant in spermatogonia, whereas those mapping to Suppressor of Stellate [Su(Ste)] and AT-chX are mostly expressed in primary spermatocytes. Furthermore we observed that transposon-mapping piRNAs with ping-pong signature are more abundant in spermatogonia albeit still detectable in primary spermatocytes where Ago3 is not expressed. These results suggest that robust piRNA production via ping-pong cycle takes place in spermatogonia, and to a lesser extent in primary spermatocytes even in the absence of Ago3. Consistently, piRNAs from ago3 mutant testes also exhibit the ping-pong signature, confirming that a non-canonical ping-pong cycle is acting during spermatogenesis. Our study provides a developmental dimension to the piRNA pathway and uncovers a new mechanism used in the male germline to silence transposons.

DESIGN
The difference in piRNA from spermatogonia and primary spermatocyte stages was studied by comparing small RNAs from bam and bgcn mutant testis, which represent spermatogonia stages with the small RNAs from apex removed can and sa testis, representing primary spermatocyte stages. In the study we also studied effect of loss of Piwi family proteins Aub and Ago3, which have different spatial expression during male germline development.

PLATFORM
GPL13304 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Drosophila melanogaster)

CITATIONS
27208314

