TITLE
RNA-Seq analysis of glycosylation related gene expression in STZ-induced diabetic rat kidney inner medulla

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
The UT-A1 urea transporter is crucial to the kidney’s ability to generate concentrated urine. Native UT-A1 from kidney inner medulla (IM) is a heavily glycosylated protein with two glycosylation forms of 97 and 117 kDa. In diabetes, UT-A1 protein abundance, particularly the 117 kD isoform, is significantly increased corresponding to an increased urea permeability in perfused IM collecting ducts, which plays an important role in preventing the osmotic diuresis caused by glucosuria. In this study, using sugar-specific binding lectins, we found that the carbohydrate structure of UT-A1 is also changed under diabetic conditions with increased amounts of sialic acid, fucose, and increased glycan branching. These changes were accompanied by altered UT-A1 association with the galectin proteins, α-galactoside glycan binding proteins. To explore the molecular basis of the alterations of glycan structures, the highly sensitive next generation sequencing (NGS) technology, Illumina RNA-seq, was employed to analyze genes involved in the process of UT-A1 glycosylation using streptozotocin (STZ) - induced diabetic rat kidney as the tissue source. Differential expression analysis combining quantitative PCR revealed that a number of important glycosylation related genes were changed under diabetic conditions. These genes include the glycosyltransferase genes Mgat4a, the sialylation enzymes St3gal1 and St3gal4and glycan binding protein galectin-3, -5, -8 and -9. In contrast, although highly expressed in kidney IM, the glycosyltransferase genes Mgat1, Mgat2, and fucosyltransferase Fut8, did not show any changes. We conclude that the alteration of these glycosylation related genes may contribute to changing the UT-A1 glycan structure, and therefore modulate kidney urea transport activity under diabetic conditions.

DESIGN
Examination of UT-A1 urea transporter glycosylation related genes under STZ-induced diabetic conditions

PLATFORM
GPL14844 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Rattus norvegicus)

CITATIONS
26483702

