TITLE
Transcriptomic analysis of the estrogenic effect of soy protein isolate in rat uterus

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
There are concerns regarding possible reproductive toxicity from consumption of soy including an increased risk of endometriosis and endometrial cancer. We used global uterine gene expression profiles in adult ovariectomized (OVX) female rats assessed by RNAseq to examine the estrogenicity of soy protein isolate (SPI) and the potential for feeding SPI to alter estrogen signaling in the uterus. Rats were fed AIN93G diets made with casein (CAS) or SPI from postnatal day (PND) 30. Rats were OVX on PND 50 and infused with 17 beta-estradiol (E2) or vehicle. E2 increased uterine wet weight (P < 0.05) and significantly altered expression of 2084 uterine genes. In contrast, SPI feeding had no effect on uterine weight and only altered expression of 177 genes. Overlap between E2 and SPI genes was limited to 69 genes (3%). GO analysis indicated significant differences in uterine biological processes affected by E2 and SPI and little evidence for recruitment of ER alpha  to the promoters of ER-responsive genes after SPI feeding. The major E2 up-regulated uterine pathways were cancer pathways and extracellular organization. SPI feeding up-regulated uterine PPAR signaling and fatty acid metabolism.  The combination of E2 and SPI feeding resulted in significant regulation of 715 fewer genes relative to E2 alone.  In a separate experiment, the combination of E2 and SPI reversed the ability of E2 to induce uterine proliferation in response to the carcinogen dimethybenz(a)anthracene (DMBA). These data suggest SPI does not act as a weak estrogen in the uterus but appears to be a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) interacting with a small sub-set of E2-regulated genes and to be anti-estrogenic in the presence of endogenous estrogens.   

DESIGN
Rat uterus mRNA of ovariectomized adult female rats subject to four different diets (Caseine, Caseine + E2, Soy and Soy+E2 )  were sequenced, in triplicate, in an Illumina GAIIx sequencer.

