TITLE
Gene Expression Profiling Of Spinal Cord Injured Patients With Intractable Neuropathic Pain

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Objective: Chronic pain is a major problem in patients with spinal cord injury (SCI). According to different studies, approximately 70% of patients with SCI experience persistent pain. Although previous gene expression profiling studies have been conducted in animal models, gene expression profiling study in human whole blood has not been reported yet. The objective of this study was to define the gene expression profile of neuropathic pain in spinal cord injured patients.  Materials and Methods: We performed gene expression analysis including 20.000 genes using Affymetrix GeneChip® Primeview™ Human Gene Expression Arrays. For confirmation of expression levels of selected genes, we performed real time polymerase chain reaction. We gathered samples from periferic blood mononuclear cells. Data of twelve patients with intractable neuropathic pain was compared with thirteen patients who don’t have pain. All patients have complete injuries with a level of injury above T5. Results: A total of 16 differentially expressed genes including 9 up-regulated and 7 down-regulated were obtained with a cut-off degree at 4 fold change.  EIF1AY, RPS4Y1, DDX3Y, RPL31, ETS1, KLF3, JUN, CYorf15B, and ERAP2 were in up-regulated and HLA-C, XIST, C4BPA, FAM118A, ZNF506, OVOS2, and C1D were in down-regulated group. KEGG pathway database showed that 14.6% of genes were enriched in the nodes of immune system. Real time polymerase chain reaction analyses did not increase to statistically significant levels for confirmation of gene expression analyze results.     Conclusions: Considering these data, findings of this first gene expression study in humans with SCI might provide valuable information for future targets for understanding neuropathic pain pathogenesis. The results of gene expression analyses were not confirmed by real time polymerase chain reaction. Studies with larger sample size are needed for confirmation.

DESIGN
This is a cross-sectional study with a control group. Patients were divided into two groups according to intractable neuropathic pain existence.There were 12 patients in group A (Patients with pain) and 13 patients in control group.

PLATFORM
GPL15207 [PrimeView] Affymetrix Human Gene Expression Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

