TITLE
A genome-wide survey for a Juvenile hormone response element, DR4, in the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Microarray analyses identified 713 genes whose expression increased or decrease by 1.5-fold with a P value < 0.01 in response to exposure to JH for 3-12 hr. 497 were up-regulated, and 228 were down-regulated. 12 genes showed differentially regulated pattern that depended on the time of exposure to JH. 73 of these genes (57 genes up-regulated and 17 genes down-regulated) showed the presence of DR4 element in their promoter regions. We also screened the promoter regions of genes whose products are distributed in different cellular locations and various functional groups and found that the DR4 element is present in 275 out of 2850 genes screened. The distribution of DR4 element containing genes varied depending on both cellular location and gene function. The genes whose products are localized to the nucleus or cytoplasm showed higher proportion of DR4 element containing genes when compared to the genes coding for products localized to the membrane. Genes belonging to immune response and ligand activated receptor functional groups showed higher number of genes that contained DR4 elements when compared to the genes belonging to protein kinase or transmembrane receptor functional groups. The DR4 elements identified in the promoter regions of D. melanogaster genes bound to the nuclear proteins isolated from JH III-treated Drosophila L57 cells. In addition, the expression of DR4 element containing genes identified from various functional groups was induced by JH III in Drosophila mbn2 cells grown in the medium containing 1 µM JH III. Presence of DR4 element in JH-responsive genes is conserved across species. This study also demonstrates the feasibility of using genome-wide analysis for identification of genes regulated by various hormones and other signaling molecules. Keywords: Time course

DESIGN
We performed microarray analysis using RNA isolated form L57 cells that were exposed to 1 µM JH III for 0, 3, 6 and 12 hr and identified 497 genes that are induced by JH and 228 genes that are down-regulated by JH. Then, we searched the promoter regions of these genes and found that 57 out of these 497 JH induced genes, and 17 out of these 228 JH down-regulated genes had conserved DR4 element present in their promoters.

PLATFORM
GPL72 [DrosGenome1] Affymetrix Drosophila Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

