TITLE
Vietnam Typhoid Study

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Patient Selection: Three hospitals were involved in the study: Dong Thap Provincial and An Giang Provincial hospitals, both located in the Mekong Delta Region of Vietnam where most of the Typhoid patients were admitted, and the Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Ho Chi Minh City, where the malarial patients were admitted. Infection status of each patient was determined by blood culture for the Typhoid patients and by microscopic examination of stained thick and thin peripheral-blood slides for the patients suspected of having Malaria. Patients with blood cultures positive for S. Typhi or S. enterica serovar Paratyphi A (S. Paratyphi A) (samples designated ST) or peripheral blood smears positive for Plasmodium falciparum or Plasmodium vivax (samples designated PF) were consented and enrolled in the study. A total of 28 S. Typhi positive patients and one S. Paratyphi A positive patient were enrolled in the first phase of the study and a further 9 S. Typhi and one S. Paratyphi A positive patient were enrolled in the second phase. Nine patients with Malaria caused by P. falciparum and one caused by P. vivax were enrolled. Sixteen uninfected healthy individuals (samples designated HC) were also enrolled in the study (one sample each). The Typhoid patients were randomly chosen to receive either Azithromycin or Gatifloxicin (20mg/kg/day for 7 days) antibiotics. Uncomplicated malaria patients were treated for 3 days with Artekin (dihydroartemisinin with piperaquine phosphate). Venous blood (2.5ml) was collected for total RNA extraction into PaxGene RNA collection tubes (Qiagen) at various times. The first sample (T1) was taken immediately on admission or entry into the study, then samples were collected, 3 (T3), 6-9 (T9 for Typhoid, T7 for Malaria), and 28-45 (T28) days following entry into the study and an average of 9 months (T9M) later. The PaxGene tubes were stored at 4degC until RNA was extracted as per the manufacturers instructions. Purified RNA was shipped on dry ice to Stanford University, CA for use in Microarray analyses. Microarrays: Experimental and reference samples (Human Universal RNA reference {Stratagene}) were amplified using the MessageAmp II aRNA Kit (Ambion) as per the manufacturer's instructions. Four micrograms amplified RNA was labeled through indirect incorporation of Cy5 (experimental) and Cy3 (reference) dyes (protocols can be found at http://cmgm.stanford.edu/pbrown/protocols/index.html ). The labeled probes were then mixed and hybridized to Stanford Human cDNA arrays with 42 K features. Arrays were scanned using a Genepix 4000A laser scanner and data extracted with Genepix Pro Software version 5.1 (Axon Instruments). The data were then uploaded into the Stanford Microarray Database (SMD). A disease state experiment design type is where the state of some disease such as infection, pathology, syndrome, etc is studied. Compound Based Treatment: Drugs used for treatment Disease State: Malaria, Typhoid or Healthy Controls Keywords: disease_state_design

DESIGN
Complex

PLATFORM
GPL4857 SHFT GPL4858 SHGC

CITATIONS
20018727

