TITLE
Transcriptome profile of liver at different physiological stages in laying hens

ORGANISM
Gallus gallus

SUMMARY
In this study, RNA-Seq technology was adopted to investigate the differences in expression profiles of the hepatic lipid metabolism-related genes and the associated pathways between juvenile and laying hens. RNA-Seq analysis was carried out to estimate total RNA harvested from the liver of juvenile hens (n = 3) and laying hens (n = 3). Compared with juvenile hens, 2574 differentially expressed (DE) genes (1487 down and 1087 up) with P ≤ 0.05 were obtained, and 955 of these genes were significantly DE (SDE) at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05 and fold-change ≥ 2 in laying hens. There were 198 SDE novel genes (107 down-regulated and 91 up-regulated) (FDR ≤ 0.05) that were obtained from the transcriptome, and most of them were highly expressed. Moreover, 332 SDE isoforms were identified. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway analysis showed that SDE genes were significantly associated with steroid biosynthesis, PPAR signaling pathway, biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids, glycerophospholipid metabolism, three amino acid pathways, and pyruvate metabolism (P ≤ 0.05). The top significantly enriched GO terms included lipid biosynthesis, cholesterol and sterol metabolic, and oxidation reduction suggesting the principal lipogenesis in the liver of laying hens. This study suggests that the major changes at the level of transcriptome in laying hen liver are closely related to fat metabolism. Some highly differentially expressed uncharacterized novel genes and alternative splicing isoforms detected might also take part in lipid metabolism, though it needs investigation. Therefore, this study provides valuable information of mRNA of chicken liver, and deeper functional investigations on the mRNAs could help explore or provide new insights into molecular networks of lipid metabolism in chicken liver.

DESIGN
The liver expression profile of juvenile hens and laying hens were generated by RNA-seq.

