TITLE
Ecological transcriptomics: a non-lethal sampling approach for endangered fire salamanders

ORGANISM
Salamandra salamandra

SUMMARY
The analysis of transcriptomes is well-established and increasingly affordable in studies at the interface of ecology and evolution. Expression analysis of thousands of genes in parallel reveals functions and pathways involved in relevant phenotypic differentiation. The application of such methods typically involves the sacrifice of the analysed organisms, which is potentially subject to ethical and legal constraints. As an alternative to lethal sampling, transcriptome analyses can be performed using small biopsies of dispensable tissues. It has to be verified, however, to what extent such results are representative of the whole organism. Here, we use a custom microarray to compare transcriptomes of tail-clip samples with those of the remaining whole-body of fire salamander larvae (Salamandra salamandra). The microarray was calibrated using target RNA to validate the performance of each probe. We varied water temperature to test whether the thermal response in gene expression can be characterized in both types of sample. A large fraction (51 %) of the differentially expressed genes showed parallel changes for both tail clips and whole bodies in response to temperature. While sets of differentially expressed were not identical, they largely belonged to the same functional categories. The gene functions thus revealed a common thermal response of larvae irrespective of the sampled tissue. This included an overexpression of mitochondrial transcripts, an expected thermal acclimatization response of ectotherms. Hence, ecological transcriptomics based on small biopsies represent an alternative to the analysis of lethally sampled tissues in situations where the sacrifice of individuals is not an option.

DESIGN
Larvae of European Fire salamander were exposed to two different temperatures (9°C & 17°C; n(cold) = 6, n(warm) = 6, n(total) = 12). The transcriptome response to temperature was assessed based on RNA extracted from tail tips, which can be sampled without sacrificing the individual, and based on RNA extracted from the remaining whole body. Results from the analysis of both tissues were compared.

PLATFORM
GPL20581 Agilent-061583 S_sala_calibration_array_1

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

