TITLE
Difference of gene expression between LPS-stimulated monocytes cultured in the presence NRBCs and those cultured in the absence of NRBCs

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
We found that human cord blood nucleated red blood cells (NRBCs) have a regulatory function in the innate immune reaction. NRBCs suppressed the production of inflammatory cytokines including TNF-a and IL-1b from monocytes in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS). NRBCs exerted the regulatory function even without cell-to-cell contact with monocytes. On the other hand, IL-10 production from monocytes by the stimulation of LPS in the presence of NRBCs was higher than that of LPS-stimulated monocytes cultured in the absence of NRBCs. Addition of an anti-IL-10 receptor blocking antibody restored the inflammatory cytokine production from monocytes, suggesting that the functional change of monocytes caused by the interaction of NRBCs was characterized and mediated by the increased IL-10 production. Whole-genome microarray analysis revealed that monocytes expressed increased amounts of IL-10 superfamily genes after the interaction with NRBCs. IL-19, one of the IL-10 superfamily, enhanced IL-10 production from monocytes, which suggested cooperative role of IL-10 superfamily in the suppression of inflammatory cytokine production from monocytes. Arginase which was reported to play an important role in the suppressive function of NRBCs on monocytes in mice was found to play no significant role in human monocytes. NRBCs seem to have a regulatory role to suppress vigorous innate immune reaction which can be harmful to the fetuses via some unknown soluble factor which enhances the production of IL-10 and IL-10 family cytokines in monocytes.

DESIGN
Human LPS-stimulated monocytes were collected after culture in a condition without and with NRBCs in transwell culture system. Only one experiment was performed.

PLATFORM
GPL17077 Agilent-039494 SurePrint G3 Human GE v2 8x60K Microarray 039381 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

