TITLE
Maternal bile acid transporter deficiency promotes neonatal demise

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) is estimated to impact between 0.4% and 5% of pregnancies worldwide. This disease is associated with elevated maternal bile acids and frequently untoward neonatal outcomes such as respiratory distress and asphyxia. Multiple candidate genes have been implicated, but none have provided insight into the mechanisms of neonatal respiratory distress and death. Herein our studies demonstrate that maternal cholestasis (due to Abcb11 deficiency) produces 100% neonatal death within 24h due to atelectasis producing pulmonary hypoxia, which recapitulates the respiratory distress and asphyxia of human ICP. We show that these neonates have elevated pulmonary bile acids that are associated with disrupted structure of pulmonary surfactant. Maternal absence of Nr1i2 superimposed upon Abcb11 deficiency strongly increased neonatal survival and is directly related to reduced maternal bile acid concentrations. The mechanism accounting for reduced serum bile acids in the mothers deficient in both Nr1i2 and Abcb11 appears related to disrupted reabsorption of intestinal bile acids due to changes in transporter expression. These findings provide novel insights into pulmonary failure by revealing bile acids capability to disrupt the structure of surfactant producing collapsed alveoli, pulmonary failure and ultimately death. These findings have important implications for neonatal health especially when maternal bile acids are elevated during pregnancy and highlight a potential pathway and targets amenable to therapeutic intervention to ameliorate this condition.

DESIGN
We used microarrays to measure changes in gene expression profiles in lung tissues from Abcb11+/- lungs after interbreeding C57BL/6 wild-type female or C57BL/6 Abcb11-/- female mice against either C57BL/6 wild-type male mice or C57BL/6 Abcb11-/- male mice to create only heterozygote offspring. We also measured profiles in liver tissues from age-matched C57BL/6 wild-type and C57BL/6 Abcb11-/- mice. Lung tissues were collected from day E17.5, E18.5 and neonatal (N0) mice. Liver tissues were collected from 1.5-month-old C57BL/6 wildtype and Abcb11-/- mice.

