TITLE
Radiosensitive hematopoietic cells determine the extent of skin inflammation in experimental epidermolysis bullosa acquisita

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Animal models have enhanced our understanding of the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. For these models, genetically identical, inbred mice have commonly been used. Different inbred mouse strains, however, show a high variability in disease manifestation. Identifying the factors that influence this disease variability could provide unrecognized insights into pathogenesis. We established a novel antibody transfer-induced model of epidermolysis bullosa acquisita (EBA), an autoimmune disease characterized by (muco)-cutaneous blistering caused by anti-type VII collagen (COL7) autoantibodies. Blistering after anti-COL7 IgG (directed against the von-Willebrand-factor A like domain 2) transfer showed clear variability among inbred mouse strains; i.e. severe cutaneous blistering and inflammation in C57Bl/6J, and absence of skin lesions in MRL/MpJ mice. The transfer of anti-COL7 IgG into irradiated, EBA-resistant MRL/MpJ mice, rescued by transplantation with bone marrow from EBA-susceptible B6.AK-H2k mice, induced blistering. To the contrary, irradiated EBA-susceptible B6.AK-H2k mice that were rescued using MRL/MpJ bone marrow were devoid of blistering. In vitro, immune complex activation of neutrophils from C57Bl/6J or MRL/MpJ mice showed an impaired ROS release from the latter, whereas no differences were observed after PMA activation. This finding was paralleled by divergent expression profiles of immune-complex activated neutrophils from either C57Bl/6J or MRL/MpJ mice. Collectively, we demonstrate that radiosensitive cells determine the varying extent of skin inflammation and blistering in the end-stage effector phase of EBA. We used microarray to differentiate between the molecular response for the immune complex stimulated neutrophils in MRL/MpJ and C57Bl/6J mice

DESIGN
To unravel the molecular basis for the different response to immune complex (IC) stimulation between MRL/MpJ and C57Bl/6J mice, the cells were activated using IC, and differential expression using microarray was compared between resting or activated neutrophils from MRL/MpJ or C57Bl/6J mice.

PLATFORM
GPL16570 [MoGene-2_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 2.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
26202985

