TITLE
Integrated metabolomic and transcriptome analyses reveal finishing forage affects metabolic pathways related to beef quality and animal welfare

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
Beef represents a major diet component and source of protein in many countries. With an increment demand for beef, the industry is currently undergoing changes towards natural produced beef. Consumers not only concern about product quality, but also for the well-being of animals. Therefore, the consumption of grass-fed meat is continuously growing. However, the nutritional true differences between feeding systems are still unclear. The aim of this study was to examine latissimus dorsi muscle quality and animal welfare by transcriptome and metabolome profiles, and to identify biological pathways related to the differences between grass- and grain-fed Angus steers. By RNA-Seq analysis of latissimus dorsi muscle, we have recognized 241 differentially expressed genes (FDR < 0.1). The metabolome examination of muscle and blood revealed 163 and 179 altered compounds in each tissue (P-value < 0.05), respectively.  Accordingly, alterations in glucose metabolism, divergences in free fatty acids and carnitine conjugated lipid levels, and altered β-oxidation, have been observed. In summary, this study demonstrates a unique transcriptomic and metabolic signature in the muscle of grain and grass finished cattle. Results support the accumulation of anti-inflammatory n3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in grass finished cattle, while higher levels of n6 PUFAs in grain finished animals may promote inflammation and oxidative stress. Furthermore, grass-fed animals produce tender beef with lower total fat and higher omega3/omega6 ratio than grain fed animals, which could potentially benefit consumer health. Finally, blood cortisol levels strongly indicate that grass fed animals experience less stress than the grass fed individuals

DESIGN
The steers came from a closed Wye Angus herd with very similar genetics. The grass-fed group was comprised of steers that received alfalfa and orchard grass hay, clover and orchard grass pasture, or orchard grass and alfalfa pasture. The grass-fed individuals consumed grazed alfalfa upon availability and bales during winter and were not exposed to any corn, any form of grain or feed by-products. The alfalfa and grass hay were harvested from land that has had minimal fertilizer and no application of pesticides or inorganic chemicals.  The control group was fed a conventional diet consisting of corn silage, soybean, shelled corn and minerals. The pastures were managed as organic lands–without fertilizers, pesticides or any chemical additives. At the slaughter plant, 10 ml whole blood sample from the jugular vein was collected in EDTA tubes and directly storage at -80°C. Then, a small piece of longissimus dorsi muscle was obtained from each hot carcass at the level of the 12th intercostal space and immediately frozen in dry ice for posterior analysis.

