TITLE
Negative-Pressure Induces p120-Catenin Dependent Adherens Junction Disassembly

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Negative-pressure wound therapy has become widely available in modern chronic wound cares. Accelerated keratinocyte (HaCaT cell) movements and decreased E-cadherin expressions induced by the applied negative pressure gradient of 125 mmHg (NP) have been reported in previous studies. However, the molecular mechanism for E-cadherin regulations under NP remains unexplored. We highlighted the signal transduction involved in NP-induced E-cadherin regulation for keratinocytes in the study. Results: Microarray results showed that catenin 1 (CTNND1) gene, the gene encoding the p120-catenin (p120ctn) in cell-cell junctions, was significantly (p = 0.0005) upregulated in HaCaT cells under NP for 12 hours in comparison with those at ambient pressure (AP). Cell fractionations and immunoblotting data showed that NP increased p120ctn phosphorylation, and resulted in p120ctn translocation from the plasma membrane to the cytoplasm. Fluorescent stains suggested that NP diminished the co-localization of p120ctn and E-cadherin on the plasma membrane. Similar phenomenon was also observed in the cells with overexpressed p120ctn at NP. Interestingly, overexpression of dN- p120ctn, a deletion mutant of p120ctn without the N-terminal phosphorylation sites, restored the adherens junctions (AJ) at NP. Knockdown of p120ctn with lentiviral small hairpin RNA not only diminished E-cadherin expressions but also accelerated cell movement at AP.  Conclusions: Phosphorylation of p120ctn is endowed to respond rapidly to NP and contributes to the AJ disassembly. This NP-induced E-cadherin downregulation can possibly accelerate wound-healing process. Conclusions: Phosphorylation of p120ctn is endowed to respond rapidly to NP and contributes to the AJ disassembly. This NP-induced E-cadherin downregulation can possibly accelerate wound-healing process.

DESIGN
HaCaT cells under negative pressure (NP) gradient of 125 mmHg for 12 hours in comparison with those at ambient pressure (AP) were tested for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays. The experiments have been biological replicated three times. The differential expression gene between NP and AP were selected and validated with qPCR method.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
27220534

MICROARRAYP
T
