TITLE
Next generation sequencing facilitates quantitative analysis of control of Candida albicans ATCC 10231 and garlic oil-treated C. albicans ATCC 10231 transcriptomes

ORGANISM
Candida albicans

SUMMARY
Purpose: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) has revolutionized systems-based analysis of cellular pathways. The goals of this study are to compare transcriptome profiling of control of C. albicans ATCC 10231 (RNA-seq) to transcriptome profiling of garlic oil-treated C. albicans ATCC 10231 and to evaluate protocols for optimal high-throughput data analysis Methods:SDB medium, C. albicans cells and garlic oil were added to two separate 50 mL conical flasks. The initial cell concentrations in culture were both 105 CFU/mL. The cultures were incubated in a water bath shaker at 28 ºC with shaking at 150 rpm for 12 h. Garlic oil or PBS buffer were then added to the cultures to make the concentrations of garlic oil arrived at 0 (control) and 1.25 μl/mL, respectively. The cultures were continuously incubated at the same conditions for 5 h. The cells were then sampled and centrifuged. The cell precipitates in the control and 1.25 μl/mL garlic oil groups were quickly separately frozen at -80 ºC. Then total RNA were repared from the cell pellets. Results:The RNA sequencing results showed that many genes in C. albicans exposed to garlic oil were differentially expressed. Nearly three thousand genes were differentially expressed, with either an increase or decrease of more than twofold. Most of them were down regulated  while a small number were upregulated. Conclusions: Our study indicated that garlic oil induced differential expression of some critical genes, such as genes for cellular response to drugs, oxidation-reduction processes, pathogenesis, and the cellular response to starvation. Moreover, the differentially expressed genes were mainly clustered in 19 KEGG pathways, such as oxidative phosphorylation, spliceosome, cell cycle, protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum, pyrimidine metabolism, meiosis, RNA transport, ribosome biogenesis, and RNA degradation.

DESIGN
The mRNA profiles of C. albicans ATCC 10231 (ck) and garlic oil-treated C. albicans ATCC 10231 (sample1) were generated by deep sequencing, in one time, using Illumina Higseq 2500.

PLATFORM
GPL19036 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Candida albicans)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
