TITLE
Genome-wide Identification of CCA1 Targets Uncovers an Expanded Clock Network in Arabidopsis

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
The plant circadian clock exerts a critical role in the regulation of multiple biological processes including responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. It is estimated that the clock regulates up to 80% of the transcriptome in Arabidopsis, thus understanding the molecular mechanisms that control this rhythmic transcriptome requires identification of the targets of each clock component. The Arabidopsis core clock is partially comprised of a transcriptional regulatory loop between the MYB domain containing transcription factors CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED1 (CCA1) and LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY), and TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION1 (TOC1). As a key component of the clock, CCA1 is able to initiate and set the phase of clock-controlled rhythms. CCA1 regulates the transcription of several genes by directly binding to the evening element (EE) motif primarily found in the promoters of evening expressed genes. Using a genome-wide approach we have identified direct targets of CCA1 in plants grown in constant (LL) and driven conditions (LD). These CCA1 targets are enriched for a myriad of biological processes and stress responses. While many of these target genes are evening phased and contain the EE in their promoter regions, a significant subset is morning phased and lack an EE. Furthermore, several CCA1 targets do not cycle in either LL or LD or both. Expression analysis in CCA1 overexpressing plants confirms CCA1 regulation of analyzed targets. Our results emphasize an expanded role for the circadian clock in regulation of key pathways in Arabidopsis, and provide a comprehensive and solid resource for future functional studies.

DESIGN
ChIP-Seq of CCA1-GFP plants under control of the CCA1 promoter in continuous light and diel conditions

PLATFORM
GPL9302 Illumina Genome Analyzer II (Arabidopsis thaliana) GPL11221 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Arabidopsis thaliana)

CITATIONS
26261339

LIBSTRATS
:CHIP-SEQ
