TITLE
Small Perturbation Approach Reveals Transcriptomic Steady State

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The ‘small perturbation’ approach is critical in studying the ‘steady state’ of a biological system. In our experiments, small perturbations were generated by applying a series of repeating intermittent small doses of ultraviolet radiation to a human keratinocyte cell line, HaCaT. The biological response was assessed by monitoring the gene expression profiles using a high reliability and high resolution cDNA microarray system. Following intermittent 10 J/m2 UVB small perturbations, two opposite classes of genes, down-regulated and up-regulated, exhibited an immediate response followed by relaxation between each small perturbation, but were prolonged down- or up-regulated without relaxation while larger doses (233 or 582.5 J/m2) of UVB were applied. A repeated cycle pattern of gene expression following small perturbations is an indication of the existence of steady states. This cycle pattern is suppressed when large perturbations are applied. We believe that this is a universal phenomenon. In our experiments, the functions of up-regulated genes were mainly associated with anti-proliferation, anti-mitogenesis, and apoptosis.  On the other hand, down-regulated genes were mainly related to proliferation, mitogenesis, and anti-apoptosis. In conclusion, this study experimentally proves the concept of steady state at the transcription level and demonstrates the feasibility of using small perturbation approaches for investigating steady states. This study could also set a foundation of computational systems biology, which has implicitly used the concept of steady state. Keywords: time course

DESIGN
Three UVB exposures are indicated by UV at time points of 0, 8 and 16 hours. T1, T2, T3, T4, T5, and T6 denote the sampling time points. T1, T3 and T5 are allocated 30 minutes after the corresponding UVB irradiation. T2, T4 and T6 are allocated 8 hours after each UVB irradiation. At each sampling time point, two samples (control and UV-irradiated) are collected. See supplementary file Loop_design.pdf for further explanation.

PLATFORM
GPL2573 MBPL human 30k P2

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

