TITLE
Integrating high-dimensional transcriptomics and image analysis tools into early safety screening (V)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In this paper we demonstrated the potential to flag toxicity issues by utilizing data from exploratory experiments which are typically generated for target evaluation purposes during early drug discovery During drug discovery and development, the early identification of adverse effects is expected to reduce costly late stage failures of candidate drugs. As risk/safety assessment takes place rather late during the development process and due to the limited predictivity of animal models to the human situation, modern unbiased high-dimensional biology read-outs are sought, such as molecular signatures of in vivo response using high-throughput cell-based assays. In this theoretical proof-of-concept we provide findings of an in-depth exploration of a single chemical core structure. Via transcriptional profiling we identified a subset of close analogs which commonly down-regulate tubulin genes across cellular contexts, suggesting possible spindle poison effects. Confirmation via a qualified toxicity assay (in vitro micronucleus test) and the identification of a characteristic aggregate-formation phenotype via exploratory high content imaging validated the inititial findings. SAR analysis triggered the synthesis of a new set of compounds and allowed us to extend the series showing the genotoxic effect. We demonstrate the potential to flag toxicity issues by utilizing data from exploratory experiments which are typically generated for target evaluation purposes during early drug discovery. We  share our thoughts on how this approach may be incorporated into drug development strategies.

DESIGN
Cells were cultured using standard protocols, seeded in 96 well plate, cultured for 8 hours before treatment with a number of inhouse synthesized compounds. The treatments represent different chemical structures/small molecules that have been synthesized in the context of developing a new drug targeting PDE10A.

