TITLE
Identification of Primary Transcriptional Regulation of Cell-Cycle-Regulated Genes upon DNA Damage

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The changes in global gene expression in response to DNA damage may derive from either direct induction or repression by transcriptional regulation or indirectly by synchronization of cells to specific cell cycle phases, such as G1 or G2.  We developed a model that successfully estimated the expression levels of > 400 cell-cycle-regulated genes in normal human fibroblasts based on the proportions of cells in each phase of the cell cycle. By isolating effects on the gene expression associated with the cell cycle phase redistribution after genotoxin treatment, the direct transcriptional target genes were distinguished from genes for which expression changed secondary to cell synchronization. Application of this model to ionizing radiation (IR)-treated normal human fibroblasts identified 150 of 406 cycle-regulated genes as putative direct transcriptional targets of IR-induced DNA damage. Changes in expression of these genes after IR treatment derived from both direct transcriptional regulation and cell cycle synchronization. Keywords: Microarray, Cell cycle, Ionizing radiation, Human fibroblasts, EPIG

DESIGN
Normal human fibroblasts were synchronized and harvested at G0, G1, S G2 and M cell cycle phase, and logarithmically growing cells were treated with 1.5 Gy IR or sham, and harvested at 2, 6 or 24 h after the treatment. Total RNA was isolated using Qiagen RNeasy kit. The quality of all RNA samples was confirmed using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. Microarray analysis was then performed: briefly, 1 µg of sample RNA and global reference RNA (Stratagene) were converted to cDNA with reverse transcriptase then amplified using T7 RNA polymerase while labeling with either Cy3-dUTP or Cy5-dUTP (Agilent’s Low RNA Input Linear Amplification Kit). The quality of each labeled cRNA was evaluated using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer prior to hybridization. 750ng of Cy3 and Cy5-labeled cRNA were used in the hybridization. The labeled cRNA from sham- or IR-treated samples was hybridized with the labeled global reference cRNA on an Agilent 22k human 1A array in a hybridization oven (Robbins Scientific Model 400, 1040-60-1AG) at 60oC for 17 h. Hybridization of sample RNA against reference RNA was done twice with dye swap. Following hybridization, the arrays were scanned using the Agilent DNA Microarray Scanner with SureScan® Technology and microarray images were analyzed using Agilent Feature Extraction Software (v7.1). The gene expression level was presented as ratio of sample intensity against reference intensity.

PLATFORM
GPL885 Agilent-011521 Human 1A Microarray G4110A  (Feature Number version) GPL887 Agilent-012097 Human 1A Microarray (V2) G4110B (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
17404513

