TITLE
The impact of oil spill to lung health – insights from an RNA-seq study of human airway epithelial cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
To reveal the potential effects of oil and oil dispersants on the respiratory system at the molecular level, we evaluated the transcriptomic profile of human airway epithelial cells grown under treatment of crude oil, the dispersants Corexit 9500 and Corexit 9527 and oil-dispersant mixtures. We identified a very strong effect of Corexit 9500 treatment, with 84 genes (response genes) differentially expressed in treatment vs. control samples. We discovered an interactive effect of oil + dispersant mixtures; while no response gene was found for Corexit 9527 treatment alone, cells treated with Corexit 9527 + oil mixture showed an increased number of response genes (46 response genes), suggesting a synergic effect of 9527 with oil on the transcriptomic perturbation of airway epithelial cells. Through GO (gene ontology) functional term and pathway-based analysis, we identified upregulation of genes involved in angiogenesis and immune responses and downregulation of genes  involved in cell junctions and steroid synthesis as the prevailing transcriptomic signatures in the cells treated with Corexit 9500, oil or Corexit 9500 + oil mixture. Interestingly, these key molecular features coincide with those observed in common lung diseases, such as asthma, cystic fibrosis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Our study provides mechanistic insights into the detrimental effects of oil and oil dispersants to the respiratory system and suggested significant health impacts of the recent BP oil spill to those people involved in the cleaning operation.

DESIGN
We profiled with RNA-seq six groups of human airway epithelial cells. Each group contains three replicate samples. These groups are oil treatment group, 9500 treatment group, 9527 treatment group, oil+9500 treatment group, oil+9527 treatment group, and control group.

PLATFORM
GPL16791 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
26692141

