TITLE
A transcriptome-based classifier to identify developmental toxicants by stem cell testing: design, validation, and optimization for histone deacetylase inhibitors

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Test systems to identify developmental toxicants are urgently needed. A combination of human stem cell technology and transcriptome analysis was used here to provide proof-of-concept that toxicants with a related mode of action can be identified, and grouped for read-across. We chose a test system of developmental toxicity, related to the generation of neuroectoderm from pluripotent stem cells (UKN1), and exposed cells for six days to benchmark concentration (BMC) of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) valproic acid, trichostatin-A, vorinostat, belinostat, panobinostat and entinostat. To provide insight into their toxic action, we identified HDACi consensus genes, assigned them to superordinate biological processes, and mapped them to a human transcription factor network constructed from hundreds of transcriptome data sets. We also tested a heterogeneous group of ‘mercurials’ (methylmercury, thimerosal, mercury(II)chloride, mercury(II)bromide, 4-chloromercuribenzoic acid, phenylmercuric acid) (BMCs). Microarray data were compared at the highest non-cytotoxic concentration for all 12 toxicants. A support vector machine (SVM)-based classifier predicted all HDACi correctly. For validation, the classifier was applied to legacy data sets of HDACi, and for each exposure situation, the SVM predictions correlated with the developmental toxicity. Finally, optimization of the classifier based on 100 probe sets showed that eight genes (F2RL2, TFAP2B, EDNRA, FOXD3, SIX3, MT1E, ETS1, LHX2) are sufficient to separate HDACi from mercurials. Our data demonstrate, how human stem cells and transcriptome analysis can be combined for mechanistic grouping and prediction of toxicants. Extension of this concept to mechanisms beyond HDACi would allow prediction of human developmental toxicity hazard of unknown compounds with the UKN1 test system.

DESIGN
We applied a test system (next referred as the UKN1 test system) of developmental toxicity, related to the generation of neuroectoderm from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), and exposed cells for six days to the histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) valproic acid, trichostatin-A, vorinostat, belinostat, panobinostat and entinostat, as well as to the mercurial compounds methylmercury, thimerosal, mercury(II)chloride, mercury(II)bromide, 4-chloromercuribenzoic acid and phenylmercuric acid. After 6 days, total RNA has been isolated and gene expression studies were performed applying the human Genome U133 plus 2.0 arrays. Untreated and vehicle controls (Ethanol and DMSO) have been also investigated. At least four independent experiments have been performed.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
26272509

