TITLE
Using the combined analysis of transcripts and metabolites to propose key genes for differential terpene accumulation across two regions

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
To obtain an interpretation from the view of transcriptome on distinct metabolite accumulation between ecologically different regions in China, next-generation sequencing technology was performed on E-L 31, 35，36 and 38 stages of Muscat Blanc a Petits Grains grape berries from Changli (CL, eastern) and Gaotai (GT, western). Transcriptome analysis revealed that some key genes involved in terpene synthesis were markedly up-regulated in the CL region. Particularly in the MEP pathway, the expression of VvHDR (1-hydroxy-2-methyl-2-butenyl 4-diphosphate reductase) paralleled with the accumulation of terpenes, which can promote the flow of isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) into the terpene synthetic pathway. The glycosidically bound monoterpenes accumulated differentially along with maturation in both regions, which is synchronous with the expression of a monoterpene glucosyltransferase gene (VvGT14). Other genes were also found to be related to the differential accumulation of terpenes and monoterpene glycosides in the grapes between regions. Transcription factors that could regulate terpene synthesis were predicted through gene co-expression network analysis. Additionally, the genes involved in abscisic acid (ABA) and ethylene signal responses were expressed at high levels earlier in GT grapes than in CL grapes.

DESIGN
cDNA libraries generated from four developmental stages (E-L 31, 35, 36 and 38) of Muscat Blanc a Petits Grains grape berries in two consecutive years from Changli (CL) and Gaotai (GT) in China were sequenced using Illumina HiSeq™ 2000.Only one RNA-seq library was constructed for each of the E-L31 and E-L36 stage samples because of the small amount of high quality RNA acquired, whereas two libraries were constructed for each of the E-L35 and E-L38 stage samples. As a result, a total of 24 libraries were obtained for the two regions within two years.

PLATFORM
GPL18740 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Vitis vinifera)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
