TITLE
Effects of long-term intake of RPS on gene expression in the colon and liver of pigs

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
To investigate effects of long-term intake of RPS on gene expression in the colon and liver of pigs,thirty-six Duroc × Landrace × Large White growing barrows were randomly allocated to corn starch (CS) and RPS groups. Each group consisted of six replicates (pens), with three pigs per pen. Pigs in the CS group were offered a corn/soybean-based diet, while pigs in the RPS group were put on a diet in which 230 g/kg (growing period) or 280 g/kg (finishing period) purified corn starch was replaced with purified RPS during a 100-day trial. Liver transcriptomic results showed that the expression of CD36, CPT1B and ACADM was down-regulated, while AGPAT4, GPAT, FABP1 and FABP3 were up-regulated by the RPS diet, indicating a decrease in fatty acid intake and synthesis, and an increase in fatty acid oxidation and glycerophospholipid synthesis.Analysis of the colonic transcriptome profiles revealed that the RPS diet changed the colonic expression profile of the host genes mainly involved in immune response pathways. RPS significantly increased proinflammartory cytokine IL-1β gene expression and suppressed genes involved in lysosome.

DESIGN
Thirty-six Duroc × Landrace × Large White growing barrows (70 days of age, 23.78 ± 1.87 kg) were randomly allocated to two groups, each group consisting of three pigs per pen, and six replicates. Pigs in the control group were offered a corn/soybean-based diet, while 230 g/kg purified corn starch (CS) was replaced with purified RPS in the RPS diet group. Diets were formulated according to the nutrient requirements of the National Research Council (1998). When animals reached the age of 120 days, diets were adapted to the nutrient requirements of the animals (finishing diet) and the amount of purified starch increased to 280 g of CS or RPS per kilogram of feed. Pigs had unlimited access to feed and water throughout the experimental period, which consisted of two 50-day trials in which the pigs consumed the growing diet (days 0-50) and finishing diet (days 51-100), respectively. On day 100, one pig from each replicate that met the target slaughter weight (105 to 110 kg) was slaughtered. The liver and colonic mucosa tissues were collected and preserved in liquid nitrogen for gene expression analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL16571 Agilent-026440 Sus scrofa (Pig) Oligo Microarray v2 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

