TITLE
Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici induces distinct transcriptome reprogramming in resistant and susceptible isogenic tomato lines

ORGANISM
Solanum lycopersicum

SUMMARY
Background: Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici (FORL) is one of the most destructive necrotrophic pathogen of tomato, causing important field and greenhouse yield losses.  Despite the relevant economic impact, little is known about the molecular mechanisms regulating the Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici resistance in tomato.   Results: A transcriptomic experiment was carried out in order to  investigate major mechanisms of FORL response in resistant and susceptible isogenic tomato lines. The microarray analysis at 15 DPI reveals a distinct gene expression pattern between the two genotypes in the inoculated vs not inoculated conditions, furthermore confirmed by a q-PCR experiment. A model of plant response for both compatible and incompatible reaction was proposed. In particular,  in the incompatible interaction an activation of defense genes related to secondary metabolites production and tryptophan metabolism was observed. Moreover, the cell osmotic potential maintenance after the FORL roots challenging was mediated by a dehydration induced protein. As for the compatible interaction the activation of an oxidative burst mediated by Peroxidases and a Cytochrome monooxigenase,  conducedthe cells to degeneration and  necrosis.   Conclusions: Our work allowed a comprehensive understanding of the molecular basis of the tomato-FORL interaction. Result obtained emphasizes a different transcriptional reaction between the resistant and the susceptible genotype to FORL challenging. Our findings could lead to the improvement of strategies of this disease control.

DESIGN
Transcriptional profiles obtained by roots inoculated with Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici (FORL) and by healthy control roots from tomato varieties resistant (Momor) or susceptible (Monalbo) to FORL were compared. Two different biological replicates were used for each sample.

