TITLE
Complete hematologic response of early-T-cell progenitor acute lymphoblastic leukemia to the gamma-secretase inhibitor BMS-906024: genetic and epigenetic findings in an outlier case

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Notch pathway antagonists such as gamma-secretase inhibitors (GSI) are being tested in diverse cancers, but exceptional responses have yet to be reported. We describe the case of a patient with relapsed/refractory early-T-cell progenitor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ETP-ALL) who achieved a complete hematologic response following treatment with the GSI BMS-906024. Whole exome sequencing of leukemic blasts revealed heterozygous gain-of-function driver mutations in NOTCH1, CSF3R, and PTPN11, and a homozygous/hemizygous loss-of-function mutation in DNMT3A. The three gain-of-function mutations were absent from remission marrow cells, but the DNMT3A mutation persisted in heterozygous form in remission marrow, consistent with an origin for the patient’s ETP-ALL from clonal hematopoiesis. Ex vivo culture of ETP-ALL blasts confirmed high levels of activated NOTCH1 that were repressed by GSI treatment, and RNA-Seq documented that GSI downregulated multiple known Notch target genes. Surprisingly, one potential target gene that was unaffected by GSI was MYC, a key Notch target in GSI-sensitive T-ALL of cortical T cell type. H3K27ac superenhancer landscapes near MYC showed a pattern previously reported in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) that is sensitive to BRD4 inhibitors, and in line with this ETP-ALL blasts downregulated MYC in response to the BRD4 inhibitor JQ1. To our knowledge, this is the first example of complete response of a Notch-mutated ETP-ALL to a Notch antagonist and is also the first description of chromatin landscapes associated with ETP-ALL. Our experience suggests that additional attempts to target Notch in Notch-mutated ETP-ALL are merited.

DESIGN
RNAseq and H3K27Ac ChIP seq of primary leukemic blasts treated in vitro with vehicle control or gamma-secretase inhibitor BMS-096024

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
Birgit Knoechel, Ami Bhatt, Li Pan, Chandra S. Pedamallu, Eric Severson, Alejandro Gutierrez, David M. Dorfman, Frank C. Kuo, Michael Kluk, Andrew L. Kung, Patrick Zweidler-McKay, Matthew Meyerson, Stephen C. Blacklow, Daniel J. DeAngelo, and Jon C. Aster. Complete hematologic response of early T-cell progenitor acute lymphoblastic leukemia to the ?-secretase inhibitor BMS-906024: genetic and epigenetic findingsin an outlier case. Cold Spring Harb Mol Case Stud 1: a000539. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/mcs.a000539

LIBSTRATS
:CHIP-SEQ :OTHER
