TITLE
Microarray Expression profiling of susceptible  (CO-3) and resistant (EC-520061) genotype of tomato in response to Early Blight pathogen after 24hrs of inoculation

ORGANISM
Solanum lycopersicum ; Solanum habrochaites

SUMMARY
A comparative study ware made to know the Early Blight resistance mechanism between resistant and susceptible plants at vegetative stage. Transcriptional changes during compatible and resistant reaction between A. solani and tomato genotypes have been identified using Affymetrix tomato gene chips. Results were confirmed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction with the samples collected after 24hrs of inoculation from inoculated and control susceptible and resistant genotypes. The number of up and down regulated genes in three different combinations of treatments i.e. Early Blight Resistant Treated and Control (EBTT and EBTC) and Early Blight Suceptible Treated and Control (EBST and EBSC)  has observed and compared.  In EBST vs. EBSC condition, 3478 genes are up regulated and 2663 are down regulated. Similarly when analysis is done between EBST and EBRT, 2475 genes are up regulated and 3662 are down regulated. Total 3442 genes are up regulated and 2695 genes are found to be down regulated in resistant line of tomato for early blight when the analysis is done for EBRT Vs. EBRC. These genes, that are induced in the resistant genotype EC-520061(Solanum habrochaites , wild)  of  tomato, after Alternaria solani infection, have been classified in to following categories, response to stress, cellular component,  Metabolic activity, regulation of transcription,  regulation of translation, and few were unknown. Data from this study are a resource for understanding the mechanism, which works for resistance against pathogen of early blight in tomato, which is critical and will be useful in improving this trait through transgenic approach or gene silencing.

DESIGN
Tomato plants were exposed to A. solani spores and after 24 hrs (at the stage of penetration of tissues with fungal hyphae) samples were collected from both susceptible and resistant genotypes for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix chips. To study the molecular mechanism of biotic stress resistance, transcripts of both the genotypes were compared in response to A. solani.

PLATFORM
GPL4741 [Tomato] Affymetrix Tomato Genome Array

CITATIONS
26697364

