TITLE
Transcriptional regulatory networks controlling woolliness in peach in response to gibberellin application and cold storage

ORGANISM
Prunus persica

SUMMARY
Cold storage (CS) is widely used to extend fruit postharvest. In peach, chilling injuries may cause intense juice loss leading to a dry ‘woolly’ texture of the fruit flesh. The disturbance, named woolliness, is associated to abnormal pectin metabolism and results in anatomical and physiological alterations. Application of gibberellic acid (GA) at the initial stages of pit hardening has been shown to impair woolliness incidence, however the mechanisms controlling the response remain unknown. We have employed genome wide transcription analyses to investigate the effects of GA application and CS of peaches. Approximately half (48.26%, 13846) of the investigated genes exhibited significant differential expression in response to the treatments. Gene ontology classes associated to cellular and developmental processes were overrepresented among the differentially regulated genes, whereas sequences classified in cell death and immune response categories were underrepresented. Gene set enrichment analyses demonstrated a predominant role of CS in repressing the transcription of genes associated to cell wall metabolism. In contrast, genes involved in hormone metabolism and signaling exhibited a more complex transcriptional response to the factors, indicating an extensive network of crosstalk between GA and low temperatures. Time course transcriptional profiling analyses also confirmed the involvement of cell wall metabolism genes in woolliness onset in peach. Overall, our results provide further insights on the mechanisms controlling the complex phenotypes associated to postharvest textural changes in peach.

DESIGN
Four samples (CONT, CONTcs, GA3, GA3cs), each with three biological replicates (R1, R2 and R3), were analyzed. Control samples (CONT and CONTcs) consist of peach mesocarp not treated with GA3 at pit hardening, and either assayed at harvest (CONT) or after 15 days of cold storage (CONTcs). GA3 samples (GA3 and GA3cs) consist of peach mesocarp treated with GA3 at pit hardening, and either assayed at harvest (GA3) or after 15 days of cold storage (GA3cs).

PLATFORM
GPL20329 Agilent-031164 Peach-with-probes-verified

CITATIONS
26582034

