TITLE
Fecal microbiota transplant rescues mice from sepsis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that replenishing the microbiota with a fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) can rescue a host from an advanced stage of sepsis. We developed a clinically-relevant mouse model of lethal polymicrobial gut-derived sepsis in mice using a 4-member pathogen community (Candida albicans, Klebsiella oxytoca, Serratia marcescens, Enterococcus faecalis) isolated from a critically ill patient. In order to mimic pre-operative surgical patient condition mice were exposed to food restriction and antibiotics. Approximately 18 hours prior to surgery food was removed from the cages and the mice were allowed only tap water. Each mouse received an intramuscular Cefoxitin injection 30 minutes prior to the incision at a concentration of 25 mg/kg into the left thigh. Mice were then subjected to a midline laparotomy, 30% hepatectomy of the left lateral lobe of the liver and a direct cecal inoculation of 200 µL of the four pathogen community. On postoperative day one, the mice were administered rectal enema. Mice were given either 1 ml of fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) or an autoclaved control (AC). This was again repeated on postoperative day two. Mice were then followed for mortality. Chow was restored to the cages on postoperative day two, approximately 45 hours after the operation. The injection of fecal microbiota transplant by enema significantly protected mice survival, reversed the composition of gut microflora and down-regulated the host inflammatory response.

DESIGN
The cecum, left lobe of the liver, and spleen were isolated from mice for microarray processing with three or more replicates for six expermental conditions:  non-treated control, SAHC POD1, SAHC.AC POD2, SAHC.FMT POD2, SAHC.AC POD7, SAHC.FMT POD7

PLATFORM
GPL6887 Illumina MouseWG-6 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

