TITLE
Leucine metabolism regulates TRI6 expression and affects deoxynivalenol production and virulence in Fusarium graminearum

ORGANISM
Fusarium graminearum

SUMMARY
TRI6 is a positive regulator of the trichothecene gene cluster and the production of trichothecene mycotoxins (deoxynivalenol [DON] and acetylated forms such as 15-ADON) in the cereal pathogen F. graminearum. As a global transcriptional regulator, TRI6 expression is modulated by nitrogen-limiting conditions, sources of nitrogen and carbon, pH, and light. However, the mechanism by which these diverse environmental factors affect TRI6 expression remains under-explored. In our effort to understand how nutrients affect TRI6 regulation, comparative digital expression profiling was performed with a wildtype F. graminearum and a Δtri6 mutant strain, grown in nutrient-rich conditions. Analysis showed that TRI6 negatively regulates genes of the branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) metabolic pathway. Feeding studies with deletion mutants of MCC, encoding methylcrotonyl-CoA-carboxylase, one of the key enzymes of leucine metabolism, showed that addition of leucine specifically down regulated TRI6 expression and reduced 15-ADON accumulation. Constitutive expression of TRI6 in the Δmcc mutant strain restored 15-ADON production. A combination of cellophane breach assays and pathogenicity experiments on wheat demonstrated that disrupting the leucine metabolic pathway significantly reduced disease. These findings suggest a complex interaction between one of the primary metabolic pathways with a global regulator of mycotoxin biosynthesis and virulence in F. graminearum.

DESIGN
Triplicate samples of digital gene expression profiling data for the Tri6 mutant and wildtype strains were compared. **Please note that the raw data files for the current study are no longer available, and therefore are not included in the submission.

PLATFORM
GPL20760 Illumina Genome Analyzer (Fusarium graminearum)

CITATIONS
26248604

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
