TITLE
Isolation and sequencing of AGO-bound RNAs reveals characteristics of stem-loop processing in vivo

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
MicroRNA precursors (pre-miRNAs) are short hairpin RNAs that are rapidly processed into mature microRNAs (miRNAs) in the cytoplasm. Due to their low abundance in cells, sequencing-based studies of pre-miRNAs have been limited. We successfully enriched for and deep sequenced pre-miRNAs in human cells by capturing these RNAs during their interaction with Argonaute (AGO) proteins. Using this approach, we detected > 350 pre-miRNAs in human cells and > 250 pre-miRNAs in a reanalysis of a similar study in mouse cells. We uncovered widespread trimming and non-templated additions to 3’ ends of pre-miRNAs and mature miRNAs. Additionally, we identified novel AGO2-cleaved pre-miRNAs and created an index for microRNA precursor processing efficiency. This analysis revealed a subset of pre-miRNAs that produce low levels of mature miRNAs despite abundant precursors, including an annotated miRNA in the 5’ UTR of the DiGeorge syndrome critical region 8 (Dgcr8) mRNA transcript. This led us to search for other AGO-associated stem-loops originating from other mRNA species, which identified hundreds of putative pre-miRNAs derived from mRNA sequences in both the mouse and human transcriptomes. Intriguingly, we found that iron responsive elements in ferritin heavy and light chain mRNAs are processed into AGO-associated stem-loops in both mouse and humans but do not produce functional small RNAs. In summary, we provide a wealth of information on mammalian pre-miRNAs, and identify novel microRNA and microRNA-like elements localized in mRNAs.

DESIGN
pre-miRNA-seq and miRNA-seq from HEK293T cells.  Reanalysis of HEK293T smRNA-seq, MEF pre-miRNA and MEF smRNA-seq (processed data for these Samples are linked below). The reanalyzed HEK293T Samples are from Series GSE66224 and consists of Samples GSM1617437 and GSM1617438. The reanalyzed MEF pre-miRNA and MEF smRNA-seq Samples were downloaded from European Nucleotide Archive ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/ ) under the accession number PRJEB6756 (ERX525474 and ERX525475). RNA-seq analysis of HEK293T cells following knockdown of DGCR8, DROSHA or Luciferase.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

