TITLE
Response of Arabidopsis roots to combinations of nitrogen and hormonal signals

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Living organisms have to cope with multiple and combined fluctuations in their environment. According to their sessile mode of life, plants are even more subjected to such fluctuations impacting their physiology and development. In particular, nutrient availability is known to tune plant development through modulating hormonal signaling, and conversely, hormonal signals are key to control nutrient related signaling pathways (Krouk et al., 2011a). However, very few is known about molecular mechanisms leading to plant adaptation to such combined signals. Here we deployed an unprecedented combinatorial treatment matrix to reveal plant adaptation in response to nitrate (NO3-), ammonium (NH4+), auxin (IAA), cytokinins (CK) and abscisic acid (ABA) and their exhaustive binary combinations.

DESIGN
In order to study the effect of 5 signaling molecules we developed a matrix of treatment including NO3- (1mM or 0.5mM), NH4+ (1mM, or 0.5mM), indol-acetic-acid (IAA: 500 nM), Kinetin (CK: 500 nM), abscisic acid (ABA: 1µM). When present, the overall nitrogen treatment has been maintained to 1mM. As such, when NO3- and NH4+ are present in the same media their concentration was divided by 2. Proper mock controls include KCl, and DMSO. Plants are grown on NH4+-succinate for 12 to 14 days (first visible true leaves). Transferred 24 hours on a refreshed N-free media (reset the background that may be exhausted in several elements), and then transferred toward fresh media containing combinations of signals. Plant roots are harvested after 4 hours of treatment for gene expression analysis. Please note that the treatment details for each sample were provided in the sample 'characteristics' column in 'NO-NH-IA-CK-AB' format followed by the Presence/Absence code used for each hormone/nutrient.

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
27811143

