TITLE
Transcriptional profiling of Klebsiella pneumoniae defines signatures for planktonic, sessile and biofilm-dispersed cells

ORGANISM
Klebsiella pneumoniae

SUMMARY
Purpose: The goal of this study was to use RNA-seq to define the Klebsiella pneumoniae transcriptome recorded under 5 different experimental conditions, and to identify signature genes of each condition by comparing global transcriptional profiles. Methods: mRNA profiles were generated for Klebsiella pneumoniae CH1034 clinical isolate, in triplicate, by deep sequencing. Total RNAs were harvested from bacteria cultured at 37°C in M63B1 minimal media under different conditions: (i) planktonic aerobic condition at OD 620nm=0.250 (exponential growth-phase), (ii) overnight planktonic aerobic condition (stationnary growth-phase), (iii) biofilm in a flow-cell chamber after 7 hours of incubation (7-hours old biofilm), (iv) biofilm in a flow-cell chamber after 13 hours of incubation (13-hours old biofilm), (v) bacteria self-dispersed from biofilm recovered in the flow-cell effluent (biofilm-dispersed bacteria). Ribosomal RNAs were removed using the Bacteria Ribo-Zero Magnetic kit (Epicentre Biotechnologies). Libraries were prepared using the TruSeq Stranded mRNA Sample Preparation kit (Illumina), and 50bp single-reads were obtained by HiSeq 2000 (Illumina).The sequence reads that passed FastQC quality filters were mapped to the CH1034 genome using Burrows–Wheeler Aligner (BWA) (0.7.12-r1039 version). The transcript levels were determined using HTSeq-count (0.6.1p1 version) with union mode followed by DESeq (1.16.0 version) analysis. qRT–PCR validation was performed using SYBR Green assays. Results: We found that each condition has a specific transcriptional profile, and we identify 4 robust signature genes for each. Conclusion: Our study represents the first detailed analysis of K. pneumoniae transcriptomes under different experimental conditions generated by RNA-seq technology. The data reported here should permit the dissection of complex biologic functions involved in the transition between the sessile and planktonic modes of growth.

DESIGN
Determination of the transcriptional profiling of Klebsiella pneumoniae under 5 different experimental conditions. mRNA profiles were generated for bacteria under exponential planktonic growth-phase, stationary planktonic growth-phase, 7 hours-old biofilm, 13 hours-old biofilm and biofilm-dispersed modes, each in three biological replicates, by deep sequencing using Illumina HiSeq

