TITLE
Dynamic membrane depolarization is an early regulator of ependymoglial cell response to spinal cord injury in axolotl

ORGANISM
Ambystoma mexicanum

SUMMARY
Salamanders, such as the Mexican axolotl, are some of the few vertebrates fortunate in their ability to regenerate diverse structures after injury. Unlike mammals they are able to regenerate a fully functional spinal cord after injury. However, the early signals required to initiate a pro-regenerative response after spinal cord injury is not well understood. To address this question we developed a spinal cord injury model in axolotls and used in vivo imaging of ion sensitive dyes and determined that spinal cord injury induces a rapid and dynamic change in the resting membrane potential of ependymoglial cells. Prolonged depolarization of ependymoglial cells after injury inhibits glial cell proliferation and subsequent axon regeneration. Using transcriptional profiling we identified c-Fos as a key voltage sensitive early response gene that is expressed specifically in the ependymoglial cells after injury. This data establishes that dynamic changes in the membrane potential after injury are essential for regulating the specific spatiotemporal expression of c-Fos that is critical for promoting faithful spinal cord regeneration in axolotl.

DESIGN
All axolotls used in these experiments were bred in the axolotl facility at the University of Minnesota under the IACUC protocol #1201A08381. Axolotls of 2–3 cm were used for all in vivo experiments, and animals were kept in separate containers and fed daily with artemia; water was changed daily. Animals were anesthetized in 0.01% p-amino benzocaine (Sigma) before microinjection was performed. Experimental Design: Ivermectin injection Ivermectin or vehicle only (water) was pressure injected into the central canal of the spinal cord, and this was visualized by the addition of Fast Green into the solution. Directly after injection, a portion of the spinal cord was surgically removed and the animals were placed back into water in individual containers. One day post injury (1dpi) animals were anesthetized again and the area of the injury was removed. Tissue from 10 animals were pooled for each microarray replicate.

