TITLE
Identification of differentially expressed genes in fore and hind wing buds of IV instar larvae of Bombyx mori (Daizo)

ORGANISM
Bombyx mori

SUMMARY
Amongst the various different insect groups, there is remarkable diversity in the number and size of wings. However the development of the basic body plan in insects is similar to a large extent. The genes of the hox complex regulate various pathways to bring about the development or modification of different organs. Ubx, a gene of the bithorax hox complex is expressed in the third thoracic segment of insects and is known to specify the fate of wing appendage in that segment.To understand the role of Ubx and how its regulatory mechanism has evolved through the course of evolution we have compared its genome wide targets in different insect orders. The identification of regulatory pathways and the key players Ubx regulates is crucial to understand how it has controlled wing development across insect orders. Our lab has previously identified direct targets of Ubx in Drosophila using ChIP-chip (Agrawal et al, 2011). To further our knowledge on the role of regulation in development and modification of hind wing appendage we have studied the targets in the hind wings of other insects (silk moth; Lepidoptera and honeybee; Hymenoptera) and performed a comparative analysis.To understand the differential development of wing appendages in insects we intend to compare the differential expression of fore and hind wing appendages in Diptera and Lepidoptera. We have employed RNA-seq using by illumina sequencing to identify the genes that are differentially expressed between fore and the hind wing bud of the Bombyx larvae. Only one replicate was performed as the intended study was to validate the differential targets in comparison to ChIP studies and other methods of select candidates.

DESIGN
Total RNA was extarcted from wing buds of IV instar Bombyx larvae and sequenced on an illumina sequencer. Wing buds were collected directly in liquid nitrogen and 80 such buds each for fore and hind wing were collected from IV instar larvae. RNA was isolated from them and processed for Library preperation and illumina sequencing. One replicate was done as a supplement to ChIP studies.

PLATFORM
GPL9151 Illumina Genome Analyzer II (Bombyx mori)

CITATIONS
27296678

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
