TITLE
Immunoproteasome dysfunction augments alternative polarization of alveolar macrophages

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The proteasome is a central regulatory hub for intracellular signaling by degrading numerous signaling mediators. Immunoproteasomes are specialized types of proteasomes known to be involved in shaping adaptive immune responses, but their role for innate immune signaling is elusive. Here, we analyzed immunoproteasome function for polarization of alveolar macrophages which are highly specialized tissue macrophages of the alveolar surface of the lung. Classical activation (M1 polarization) of primary alveolar macrophages by LPS/IFNγ transcriptionally induced all three immunoproteasome subunits LMP2, LMP7, and MECL-1. In contrast, IL-4 triggered alternative (M2) activation was accompanied by posttranscriptional upregulation of LMP2 and LMP7. Accordingly, immunoproteasome activity increased in M1 cells, and to some extent under M2 conditions. Analyzing the polarization capability from LMP7 deficient mice revealed no effect on the LPS/IFNγ triggered M1 profile, but uncovered a distorted M2 profile for IL-4 stimulated LMP7-/- alveolar macrophages as characterized by increased M2 marker gene expression and CCL17 cytokine release. This shift in immunoproteasome-dependent M2 polarization was accompanied by amplified AKT/STAT6 activation and IRF4 expression in LMP7-/- alveolar macrophages. IL-13 stimulation of LMP7 deficient cells induced a similar M2 skewed profile and IL4Rα protein expression was generally elevated in LMP7-/- alveolar macrophages, indicating that amplified IL4R signaling in immunoproteasome defective cells may contribute to augmented M2 polarization. Importantly, treatment with an LMP7-specific proteasome inhibitor recapitulated the findings of genetic LMP7 inactivation. Our results thus suggest a novel role of immunoproteasome function for regulating innate immune function of macrophages by limiting IL4R expression and signaling.

DESIGN
Expression data of M0 and M2 macrophages derived from Lmp7 k.o. and control animals

PLATFORM
GPL6885 Illumina MouseRef-8 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
26990663

