TITLE
Effects of Intramuscular Administration of Folic Acid and Vitamin B12 on Granulosa Cells Gene Expression in Postpartum Dairy Cow

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
The fertility of dairy cows is challenged during early lactation and better nutritional strategies need to be developed to address this issue. Combined supplementation of folic acid and vitamin B12 improves energy metabolism in the dairy cow during early lactation. Therefore, the present study was undertaken to explore the effects of this supplement on gene expression in granulosa cells from the dominant follicle during the postpartum period. Multiparous Holstein cows received weekly intramuscular injection of 320 mg folic acid and 10 mg vitamin B12 (treated group) beginning 24 (SD 4) d before calving until 56 d after calving, whereas the control group received saline. The urea plasma concentration was significantly decreased during the pre-calving period, and the concentration of both folate and vitamin B12 were increased in treated animals. Milk production and dry matter intake were not significantly different between the two groups. Plasma concentrations of folates and vitamin B12 were increased in vitamin-treated animals. Daily dry matter intake was not significantly different between the 2 groups before (13.5 kg SE 0.5) and after (23.6 kg SE 0.9) calving. Average energy-corrected milk tended to be greater in vitamin-treated cows, 39.7 (SE 1.4) and 38.1 (SE 1.3) kg/d for treated and control cows, respectively. After calving, average plasma concentration of BHBA tended to be lower in cows injected with the vitamin supplement, 0.47 (SE 0.04) vs. 0.55 (SE 0.03) for treated and control cows, respectively. The ovarian follicle ? 12 mm in diameter was collected by ovarian pick-up after estrus synchronization. Recovered follicular fluid volumes were greater in the vitamin-treated group. A microarray platform was used to investigate the impact of treatment on gene expression of granulosa cells. Lower expression of genes involved in the cell cycle and higher expression of genes associated with granulosa cell differentiation prior to ovulation were observed. Selected candidate genes were analyzed by reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Although the effects of intramuscular injections of folic acid and vitamin B12 on lactational performance and metabolic status of animals were limited, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of gene expression in granulosa cells suggests a stimulation of cell differentiation in vitamin-treated cows, which may be the result of an increase in LH secretion.

DESIGN
Two conditions experiment (Control and Treated). Granulosa cells from the 66h post second PGF2alpha injection. Biological replicates: 3 from each time point. Two technical replicates for each comparison (dye-swap).

