TITLE
Enhanced Expression of FKBP51 in Endometrium of Women Using Long-Acting Progestin-Only Contraceptives: Implications for Functional Progesterone and Glucocorticoid Withdrawal

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Use of long-acting progestin-only contraceptives (LAPCs) offers a discrete and highly effective family planning method. Abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) is the major side effect of, and cause for, discontinuation of LAPCs. The endometria of LAPC-treated women display abnormally enlarged, fragile blood vessels, decreased endometrial blood flow and oxidative stress. To understand the mechanisms underlying AUB, we propose to identify LAPC-modulated unique gene cluster(s) in human endometrial stromal cells (HESCs). Protein and RNA isolated from cultured HESCs treated 7 days with estradiol (E2) or E2+medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) or E2+ etonogestrel (ETO) or E2+progesterone (P4) were analyzed by q-PCR and immunoblotting. HSCORES were determined for immunostained-paired endometria of pre-and 3 months post-Depo-Provera (Depo) treated women (n=6) and ovariectomized guinea pigs (GPs; n=12) treated with placebo or E2 or MPA or E2+MPA for 21 days. In HESCs, whole genome analysis identified a 67-gene group regulated by all three progestins, whereas a 235-gene group was regulated by E2+ETO and E2+MPA, but not E2+P4. Ingenuity pathway analysis identified glucocorticoid receptor (GR) activation as an upstream regulator of the 235 LAPCMPA and ETO-specific genes. Among these, microarray results demonstrated significant enhancement of FKBP51, a repressor of PR/GR transcriptional activity, by both LAPCsMPA and ETO. q-PCR and immunoblot analysis confirmed the microarray results. In endometria of post-Depo versus pre-Depo administered women, FKBP51 expression was significantly increased in endometrial stromal and glandular cells. In GPs, E2+MPA or MPA significantly increased FKBP51 immunoreactivity in endometrial stromal and glandular cells versus placebo- and E2-administered groups. LAPC MPA or ETO administration activates GR signaling and increases endometrial FKBP51 expression, which could be one of the mechanisms causing AUB by inhibiting feeds back to inhibit PR- and GR-mediated transcription. The resultant PR- and/or GR-mediated functional withdrawal may contribute to associated endometrial inflammation, aberrant angiogenesis, and bleeding.

DESIGN
Total RNA (n=3) obtained from cultured HESCs treated with vehicle only (CON) or ETO or M or P for 6h.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

