TITLE
Boron-deficiency-responsive microRNAs and their targets in Citrus sinensis leaves

ORGANISM
Citrus sinensis

SUMMARY
Background: MicroRNAs play important roles in the adaptive responses of plants to  nutrient deficiencies. Here, we sequenced two small RNA libraries from B-deficient and  -sufficient (control) Citrus sinensis leaves, respectively, using Illumina sequencing in  order to identify the potential miRNAs related to the tolerance of citrus to B-deficiency.  Results: Ninety one (83 known and 8 novel) up- and 81 (75 known and 6 novel) downregulated miRNAs were isolated from B-deficient leaves. The great alteration of miRNA  expression might contribute to the tolerance of citrus to B-deficiency. The adaptive  responses of miRNAs to B-deficiency might related to several aspects: (a) attenuation  of plant growth and development by repressing auxin signaling due to decreased TIR1 level and ARF-mediated gene expression by altering the expression of miR393,  miR160 and miR3946; (b) maintaining leaf phenotype and enhancing the stress  tolerance by up-regulating NACs targeted by miR159, miR782, miR3946 and miR7539;  (c) activation of the stress responses and antioxidant system through down-regulating  the expression of miR164, miR6260, miR5929, miR6214, miR3946 and miR3446; (d)  decreasing the expression of major facilitator superfamily protein genes targeted by  miR5037, thus lowering B export from plants. Also, B-deficiency-induced downregulation of miR408 might play a role in plant tolerance to B-deficiency by regulating  Cu homeostasis and enhancing superoxide dismutase activity.  Conclusions: Our study reveals some novel responses of citrus to B-deficiency, which  increase our understanding of the adaptive mechanisms of citrus to B-deficiency at the  miRNA (post-transcriptional) level.

DESIGN
Two libraries were constructed from C. sinensis leaves subjected to 0(B-deficient, Xa) or 10(B-sufficient,control, Xb) μM B   for 15 weeks, and sequenced by Illumina sequencing. Size fractionated small RNAs (16-30 bp) from total RNA extracts was ligated to 5' and 3' adapters, and reverse transcribed. After PCR amplification the sample was subjected to Solexa sequencing. The clean tags were used for further analysis.

