TITLE
Epigenomic profiling of preterm infants reveals DNA methylation differences at sites associated with neural function

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
DNA methylation (DNAm) plays a determining role in neural cell fate and provides a molecular link between early life stress and life-course neuropsychiatric disease. Preterm birth is a profound environmental stressor that is closely associated with alterations in connectivity of neural systems and long-term neuropsychiatric impairment. The aims of this study were to examine the relationship between preterm birth and DNAm and to investigate factors that contribute to variance in DNAm. DNA was collected from preterm infants (birth < 32 weeks’ gestation) and healthy controls (birth > 37 weeks), and a genome-wide analysis of DNAm was performed; diffusion MRI (dMRI) data were acquired from the preterm group. The major fasciculi were segmented, and fractional anisotropy, mean diffusivity and tract shape were calculated. Principal components analysis was used to investigate the contribution of MRI features and key clinical variables to variance in DNAm.  Differentially methylated regions were found within 25 gene bodies and 61 promoters of protein-coding genes in preterm infants compared with controls; 10 of these are associated with neural development or function. Differences detected in the array were validated with pyrosequencing. Ninety-five percent of the variance in DNAm in preterm infants was explained by 23 principal components (PC); corticospinal tract shape associated with 6th PC, and gender and early nutritional exposure associated with the 7th PC.   Preterm birth is associated with alterations in the methylome at sites that influence neural development and function. The differentially methylated regions identified provide several promising candidate genes for understanding the genetic/epigenetic basis of preterm brain injury.

DESIGN
DNA was extracted from the saliva of 36 preterm neonates 36 full term controls ( > 37 weeks postmenstrual age) and hybridised to the Illumina Infinium 450k Human Methylation Beadchip

PLATFORM
GPL13534 Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (HumanMethylation450_15017482)

CITATIONS
26784970

