TITLE
PHB Acts as a Member of the HIRA Complex to Control an Epigenetic and Metabolic Circuitry

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Cellular metabolism and chromatin landscape both contribute to cell fate determination. However, their interplay remains poorly understood. Here we show that Prohibitin (PHB), an evolutionarily conserved protein, involves in a histone variant H3.3 chaperon HIRA complex-dependent epigenetic and metabolic circuitry to maintain the identity of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). We found that silencing of PHB triggers hESC differentiation with concomitant enhancements of histone 3 (H3) lysine (K) methyl modifications as a result of the reduced production of α-ketoglutarate (α-KG), a metabolite required for activities of many dioxygenase and in turn chromatin structure1,2. Mechanistically, PHB acts as a functional member of the HIRA complex3,4. Resembling PHB deficiency, loss of HIRA in hESCs leads to massive differentiation and aberrant histone modifications, although it was previously found not to disrupt the self-renewal in mouse ESCs (mESCs)5. Genome-wide H3.3 ChIP- sequence analyses indicate that reduction of H3.3 deposition caused by PHB knock down is extremely similar to that induced by HIRA knock down. Specifically, silencing either HIRA or PHB leads to repressive chromatin characters at promoters of pluripotency genes and isocitrate dehydrogenases (IDHs), the enzyme responsible for α-KG production, but active chromatin features at promoters of developmental genes, paralleling to transcript levels of these genes. Our results identify PHB as an essential factor not only for hESC self-renewal but also for the proper function of the HIRA complex, linking the HIRA complex-dependent H3.3 deposition to the production of a critical metabolite required for shaping chromatin structure, and demonstrating the importance of the interplay between epigenetic state and metabolic regulation in cell fate determination.

DESIGN
Examination of H3.3 deposition in NT, PHB, and HIRA siRNA treated hESCs respectively.

PLATFORM
GPL16791 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

