TITLE
The effect of developmental transitions on small RNAs in Arabidopsis thaliana shoots

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
We were interested in changes in small RNA abundance changes in response to developmental transitions in Arabidopsis thaliana shoots, with special focus on vegetative phase change. We specifically wanted to separate the temporal changes in gene expression that result from vegetative phase change and those from flowering. Because of the close timing between the juvenile-to-adult and adult-to-reproductive developmental transitions in Arabidopsis grown under long day conditions, we used the late-flowering genotype FRI;FLC developed by the lab of Richard Amasino by introgressing the FRI allele from Sf-2 into the Col-0 genetic background, which is fri;FLC. For the early flowering genotype, we used FRI;flc-3, also developed by the Amasino lab by EMS-mutagenizing FRI;FLC, identifying early flowering mutants, and backcrossing multiple times to eliminate other EMS-induced mutations. The onset of vegetative phase change in FRI;FLC and FRI;flc-3 under our growth conditions was identical, but the progression was slower in FRI;FLC. By sequencing small RNAs from shoot apices at different time points and fully-expanded leaves at different positions on the shoot and comparing the results between the two genotypes, we were able to obtain a clear picture of changes in small RNA abundance in response to vegetative phase change and flowering in Arabidopsis. For the small RNA samples, we performed two replicates using two different indices in the 5'-adapter and ran each replicate pair on the same sequencing lane. For the cotyledon and leaf samples we only performed one replicate using the same index for all samples because we obtained significantly different results with the two adapters used for the shoot apices, preventing us from using them as true replicates.

DESIGN
Genome-wide small RNA profiling was done by a home assembled version of Illumina's  2007 small RNA library sample preparation followed by high-throughput sequencing with Illumina's Genome Analyzer II platform. 

PLATFORM
GPL9302 Illumina Genome Analyzer II (Arabidopsis thaliana)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

