TITLE
Transcriptome profile analysis of cell proliferation molecular processes during multicellular trichome formation induced by tomato Wov gene in tobacco

ORGANISM
Nicotiana tabacum

SUMMARY
Purpose: Trichomes, developing from the epidermis of nearly all terrestrial plants, provide good structural resistance against insect herbivores and an excellent model for studying the molecular mechanisms underlying cell fate determination. Regulation of trichomes in Rosids has been well characterized. However, little is known about the cell proliferation molecular processes during multicellular trichome formation in Asterids. Methods: The transcriptomes of  between Wov transgenic and wild-type tobacco by RNA-seq analysis were evaluated using the Illumina HiSeq™ 2000 sequencing platform. Raw sequences were filtered and the resulting sets of clean reads were used for the following analysis by Tophat and DEGseq software.  qRT–PCR validation was performed using  SYBR Green assays. Results: In this study, we identified two point mutations in a novel allele (Wov) at Wo locus. Ectopic expression of Wov in tobacco and potato induces much more trichome formation than wild type. To gain new insights into the underlying mechanisms during the processes of these trichomes formation, we compared the gene expression profiles between Wov transgenic and wild-type tobacco by RNA-seq analysis. A total of 544 co-DEGs were detected between transgenic and wild-type tobacco. Functional assignments of the co-DEGs indicated that 33 reliable pathways are altered in transgenic tobacco plants. The most noticeable pathways are fatty acid metabolism, amino acid biosynthesis and metabolism, and plant hormone signal transduction. Results suggest that these enhanced processes are critical for the cell proliferation during multicellular trichome formation in transgenic plants. In addition, the transcriptional levels of homologues of trichome regulators in Rosids were not significantly changed, whereas homologues of genes (Wo and SlCycB2) in Asterids were significantly upregulated in Wov transgenic tobacco plants. Conclusions: This study presents a global picture of the gene expression changes induced by Wov- gene in tobacco. And the results provided us new insight into the molecular processes controlling multicellular formation in tobacco. Furthermore, we inferred that trichomes in solanaceous species might share a common network.

DESIGN
The transcriptomes of  between Wov transgenic and wild-type tobacco by RNA-seq analysis were evaluated, in duplicate, using the Illumina sequencing platform.

PLATFORM
GPL13760 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Nicotiana tabacum)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

