TITLE
Remodeling of major genomic fabrics and their interplay in Capridine-treated DU145 classic human prostate cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Our preclinical developmental program identified Capridine as a chemotherapeutic agent that had specificity towards prostate cancer with minimal bone marrow toxicity. In human prostate cancer xenograft studies both androgen responsive and non-responsive tumors were inhibited by a weekly therapeutic regimen Capridine. The minimal bone marrow toxicity as seen in rodent and dog preclinical studies is in line with its twenty-fold differential activity in prostate cancer cells vs. the promyelocytic leukemic cell line HL-60.   This differential activity was partly attributed to its activity on γH2AX modulation, which was considered as one of the targets.  Capridine structure is consistent with a classical DNA intercalating agent; however, its DNA intercalation property does not fully correlate with its anti prostate cancer specific activity. To identify the cellular targets of Capridine in a more comprehensive manner we analyzed its transcriptomic effects on androgen non-responsive DU145 cells. Agilent human gene expression microarray analysis indicated that expression of 97 unigenes genes was altered by Capridine. Our data confirm that, in addition to DNA intercalation, Capridine targets DNA transcription via histone modulation in a cell-specific manner.

DESIGN
Two-conditions: DO = not treated, DA = Capridine-treated DU145 cells. Four biological replicates of each condition. Differently labeled biological replicates were cohybridized with each array. Results of similarly labeled different conditions were compared then averaged for the two fluorescent labels. For instance: DO1 & DO3 were compared with DA1 & DA3, DO2 & DO4 were compared  with DA2 & + DA4, and the results of the comparisons averaged. This design uses 100% of the resources, has a better normlaiztion and allows all possible comparisons among the conditions.

PLATFORM
GPL10332 Agilent-026652 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K v2 (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

