TITLE
Changes in eutopic endometrial gene expression during the progression of experimental endometriosis in the baboon, Papio anubis

ORGANISM
Papio anubis

SUMMARY
Endometriosis is associated with aberrant gene expression in the eutopic endometrium of women with disease. To determine if the development of endometriotic lesions directly impacts eutopic endometrial gene expression, we sequentially analyzed the eutopic endometrium across the time course of disease progression in a baboon model of induced disease. Endometriosis was induced in baboons by intraperitoneal inoculation of autologous menstrual endometrium. Eutopic endometria were collected at 9-11 days postovulation) in five time points: 1, 3, 6-7, 10-12, and 15-16 months after disease induction and compared with tissue from disease-free baboons. We used microarrays to identify differentially expressed genes between time points. Sequential analysis of the same animals during disease progression demonstrated an early disease insult and a transitory dominance of an estrogenic phenotype. However, as the disease progressed, a progesterone-resistant phenotype became evident.

DESIGN
Endometriosis was experimentally induced in Papio anubis female baboons (n = 4) by intraperitoneal inoculation with menstrual endometrium on two consecutive menstrual cycles. Baboons with spontaneous endometriosis (n = 2) were also included in this study with an unknown duration of disease. Control endometrium was similarly harvested from animals (n = 4) with no previous surgeries and with no visible disease. The progression of disease was monitored in each animal by consecutive laparoscopies and video recording at 1 (n = 2), 3 (n = 4), 6-7 (n = 4), 10-12, (n = 4), and 15-16 (n = 3) months after inoculation during a window of 9-11 days postovulation. Eutopic endometrial tissues were harvested and were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for RNA extraction. Additionally, menstrual endometrium was harvested on Days 1-2 of menses using a Unimar Pipelle (Cooper Surgical Inc., Shelton, CT) immediately prior to laparoscopy. Blood samples were collected daily from days 7 through 16 postmenstruation of menstrual cycles.

PLATFORM
GPL18756 Affymetrix HG-U133_PLUS_2[CDF: HGU133Plus2_Hs_ENTREZG_14.1.0]

CITATIONS
23284138

