TITLE
Zonal Gene Expression and Gene Regulatory Network Responses in Centrilobular and Periportal Hepatocytes Following Repeated Exposure to TCDD (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin)

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Wild-type and AHR-KO rats harboring a 29-bp deletion mutation in exon 2 of the AHR gene were used in this study.  Wild-type and AHR-KO rats were generated from heterozygous breeding stocks generated on a Sprague-Dawley outbred background and maintained at the Hamner Institutes for Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina Persistent activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is believed to play a key role in the mode-of-action for TCDD induced rat liver tumorigenesis. It has been hypothesized that the cellular responses of hepatocytes to AHR activation may differ across regions of the liver lobule and that zone-specific effects of AHR agonists may play a role in the pathogenesis of rat liver tumorigenesis. Dose-dependent changes in gene expression were observed in both populations of hepatocytes collected from WT rats which were consistent with activation of AHR signaling.  No significant or dose-dependent changes in gene expression were observed in samples from AHR-KO rats.  In addition, evidence of inflammatory signaling pathway activation was observed only in centrilobular hepatocytes.  Evidence of cell adhesion pathway enrichment was observed only in periportial hepatocytes.  Benchmark dose analysis demonstrated that dose-dependent changes in gene expression occurred at lower doses in centrilobular as compared to periportal hepatocytes.  These results indicate zone-specific differences in the sensitivity and response of hepatocytes to persistent AHR activation.

DESIGN
AHR-KO and WT rats (n = 10 rats/dose/genotype) were dosed by oral gavage (4-5 doses / week, 19 total doses) with varying concentrations of TCDD in corn oil (0, 3, 22, 100, 300, 1000 ng/kg/day). Cryopreserved liver slices collected at necropsy were thawed, cryosectioned (12 µm thickness), fixed with ethanol and “quick-stained” with hematoxylin. Centrilobular and periportal hepatocytes were collected using laser capture microdissection. Total RNA was extracted, amplified and labeled using low-yield techniques and global transcriptomic profiles were obtained using Affymetrix Gene-Titan peg arrays.

