TITLE
The identificantion of novel miRNA targets in Arabidopsis thaliana shoots using genome-wide mapping of uncapped and cleaved transcripts (GMUCT) 2.0

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
We were interested in identifying targets of novel putative miRNAs we identified from small RNA sequencing libraries of Arabidopsis shoots. The small RNA (smRNA) sequencing libraries were made to identify changes in abundance of specific smRNAs in response to developmental transitions in Arabidopsis thaliana shoots, with special focus on vegetative phase change. We specifically wanted to separate the temporal changes in gene expression that result from vegetative phase change and those from flowering. Because of the close timing between the juvenile-to-adult and adult-to-reproductive developmental transitions in Arabidopsis grown under long day conditions, we used the late-flowering genotype FRI;FLC developed by the lab of Richard Amasino by introgressing the FRI allele from Sf-2 into the Col-0 genetic background, which is fri;FLC. For the early flowering genotype, we used FRI;flc-3, also developed by the Amasino lab by EMS-mutagenizing FRI;FLC, identifying early flowering mutants, and backcrossing multiple times to eliminate other EMS-induced mutations. The onset of vegetative phase change in FRI;FLC and FRI;flc-3 under our growth conditions was identical, but the progression was slower in FRI;FLC. By sequencing small RNAs from shoot apices at different time points and fully-expanded leaves at different positions on the shoot and comparing the results between the two genotypes, we were able to obtain a clear picture of changes in small RNA abundance in response to vegetative phase change and flowering in Arabidopsis. We then used the remaining RNA to make genome-wide mapping of uncapped and cleaved transcripts (GMUCT) 2.0 libraries of a subset of our samples. GMUCT 2.0 allows you to identify RNAs that are 1) uncapped and in the process of 5’- > 3’ exonuclease degradation and 2) miRNA and siRNA-mediated cleavage products. We wanted to use these GMUCT 2.0 libraries to identify targets of novel putative miRNAs discovered by our smRNA sequencing, thereby supporting the idea that these novel putative miRNAs are in fact functional.

DESIGN
Genome-wide uncapped and cleaved transcript profiling was done using GMUCT 2.0 library sample preparation followed by high-throughput sequencing with Illumina's TruSeq platform. 

