TITLE
Hepatic transcriptional profiling of juvenile broiler chickens divergently selected for high or low body weight

ORGANISM
Gallus gallus

SUMMARY
Divergently selected chickens for either high growth (HG genotype) or low growth (LG genotype) developed at SRA-INRA, France were used to profile hepatic gene expression during juvenile development (1 to 11 weeks of age) and to identify differentially expressed genes associated with genotype and age. The HG and LG chickens are different in various phenotypic and metabolic measurements, including growth rate, abdominal fat, plasma glycemia, insulinemia, T4, T3, triglyceride and NEFA. The HG and LG chickens are valuable as a model for biomedical and agricultural traits. The Del-Mar 14K Chicken Integrated Systems microarrays were used for a transcriptional scan in liver during juvenile development using a balanced block hybridization design. Log2-transformed fluorescence intensities were analyzed with a two-stage mixed model. A total number of 531 differentially expressed genes were identified. The greatest number of genes was detected at 7 weeks of age where 178 genes were up-regulated in the HG and 162 genes up-regulated in the LG. The differentially expressed genes include metabolic enzymes, acute phase proteins, immune factors and transcription factors involved in various pathways (i.e.,  fatty acid and amino acid metabolism, glycolysis, oxidative phosphorylation, growth factor signaling and immune defense). Several of these functional genes are also identified as positional candidate genes within QTLs in an F2 population established from an intercross between the HG and LG lines. Keywords: divergently selected chickens, growth, transcriptional profiling, differentially expressed genes

DESIGN
A balance block design was used for microarray hybridizations, where half of the birds of each genotype and age were labeled with Alexa Flour 647 (red) and the other half with Alexa Flour 555 (green). Four biological replicates were used for each genotype (HG or LG) at six different ages (1, 3, 5, 7, 9 and 11 wk). An additional hybridization of eight replicates for each age and genotype was performed to verify the small number of differentially expressed genes detected at 1 and 3 weeks in the first hybridization.  The second hybridization included four technical replicates (same birds that were originally used for the first hybridization) and four additional biological replicates with different birds from each genotype at 1 and 3 weeks of age.

PLATFORM
GPL1731 DEL-MAR 14K Integrated Systems

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

