TITLE
Transcriptional changes in sensory ganglion associated with primary afferent collateral sprouting in spared dermatome model

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Primary afferent collateral sprouting (PACS) is a process whereby non-injured primary afferent neurons respond to some stimulus by extending new branches from existing axons. In the model used here (spared dermatome), the intact sensory neurons respond to the denervation of adjacent areas of skin by sprouting new axon branches into that adjacent denervated territory. Neurons of both the central and peripheral nervous systems undergo this process, which contributes to both adaptive and maladaptive plasticity. Investigations of gene expression changes associated with PACS can provide a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms controlling this process. Consequently, it can be used to develop treatment for spinal cord injury to promote functional recovery. In this study, we sought to identify gene expression changes in PACS using 20 Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 microarrays. The experiments were designed to discover global gene expression changes in non-injured DRG neurons undergoing PACS. T11 DRG neurons remained intact and undergo PACS after the cutaneous nerves of the adjacent segments (T9, T10, T12, and T13) were injured and regeneration of those injured nerves prevented by ligation. Thus, the T9, T10, T12, and T13 dermatomes were denervated, but the T11 dermatome remained intact. Axons of the T11dermatome (and thus housed in the T11 dorsal root ganglion (DRG)), extended new branches to innervate the T9, T10, T12, and T13 dermatomes. N.B.: This is NOT a spared root experiment. ALL spinal roots were non-injured. Peripheral nerves were used.

DESIGN
A total of 20 Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 microarrays were analyzed: six naïve controls, seven replicates at day 7 post-surgery (presumed to represent an “initiation phase”), and seven replicates at day 14 post-surgery (presumed to represent a “maintenance phase”). DRGs were NOT pooled onto microarrays. Each animal had its own microarray with T11 DRG sample which underwent 2-round amplification. After quality control analysis, one of the naïve control microarrays was removed from further analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL1355 [Rat230_2] Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
26697387

