TITLE
Propionibacterium acnes inhibits FOXM1 (Forkhead box M1) and induces cell cycle alterations in human primary prostate cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The composition of the prostate microbiome may influence the fate of the cells that may be relevant to prostate morbidity. Several independent studies have reported the presence of the bacterium Propionibacterium acnes in diseased human prostate tissue. It is unclear if the bacterium is an infectious agent, part of a normal prostate microbiota or if it is derived from the skin and accidentally introduced, for instance during a prostate biopsy. Previous research with prostate cell culture and animal models has revealed the capability of P. acnes to establish a low-grade chronic inflammation. However, the fate of primary prostate cells exposed to P. acnes has not been investigated in molecular detail. Here, we investigated the impact of P. acnes on human primary prostate epithelial cells (PrEC). An initial analysis of the host cell response by microarray technology confirmed the inflammation-inducing capability of P. acnes but also showed the deregulation of genes involved in cell cycle, and more specifically in kinetochore and centromere functionality. In particular, we could show and confirm by qPCR that only viable P. acnes downregulated a master regulator of cell cycle progression, FOXM1, as well as its target genes. It was further shown by flow cytometry that P. acnes was indeed able to alter the cell cycle by increasing the number of PrEC cells in S-phase. In search for a molecular explanation we tested the hypothesis that a P.acnes produced berninamycin A-like thiopeptide, that is a structurally closely related to the known FOXM1 inhibitor siomycin A, is responsible for the effect on FOXM1 and the cell cycle. A knock-out mutant in P. acnes was created that lacked the gene encoding the berninamycin A peptide precursor; this mutant was unable to downregulate FOXM1, suggesting that a berninamycin A-like thiopeptide induces cell cycle alterations in PrEC cells. Interestingly, the gene cluster encoding this thiopeptide is restricted to a subtype of P. acnes that is relatively rare on human skin, but more often found in prostate tissue.

DESIGN
Microarray experiments were performed as dual-color hybridizations on Agilent mouse whole genome catalog 44K arrays. To compensate for dye-specific effects, a dye-reversal color-swap was applied.

PLATFORM
GPL4133 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Feature Number version) GPL10332 Agilent-026652 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K v2 (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
27424770

