TITLE
epithelial-mesenchymal interaction of the breast

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
These 95 arrays are the basis for Figure 2 of our manuscript " An interferon-response induced by tumor-stroma interaction in a subset of human breast cancers " . Abstract:Background Communication between different cell types is a cardinal feature of multi-cellular organisms and perturbations in these cell-cell interactions are a key feature of cancer.  However, little is known about the systematic effects of cell-cell interaction on global gene expression in cancer.  Methods and Findings We used an ex vivo culture model to simulate tumor-stroma interaction by systematically co-cultivating breast cancer cells with stromal fibroblasts and determined associated gene expression changes with cDNA microarrays. The picture of heterotypic interaction effects that emerged from this analysis is complex, reflecting the variation in signaling capacities and responsiveness of the involved cells. A frequent and prominent response to epithelial-mesenchymal interaction was an induction of interferon-response genes, observed in 4 of the 7 breast cancer cell lines in response to co-culture with fibroblasts, but not in normal mammary epithelial cells.  In response to close contact with these breast cancer cells, the fibroblasts secreted type I interferons, which, in turn, induced expression of the IRGs in the tumor cells.  Immunohistochemical analysis of human breast cancer tissues showed that STAT1, the key transcriptional activator of the interferon-response genes, and itself an IRG, was expressed in a subset of the cancers, with a striking pattern of elevated expression in the cancer cells in contact with, or close proximity to, the tumor stroma ? paralleling the response seen in our ex vivo model. In vivo, expression of the interferon-response genes was remarkably coherent, providing a basis for segregation of the 295 early-stage breast cancers into two groups. Tumors with high expression levels (n=161) of IRG were associated with significantly shorter overall survival; 59 % at 10 years versus 80% for tumors with low interferon-response gene expression levels (n=134) (log-rank p=0.001).  Conclusion Our results suggest that an interaction between some breast cancer cells and stromal fibroblasts can induce an interferon response, and that this response may be associated with a greater propensity for tumor progression. Set of arrays organized by shared biological context, such as organism, tumors types, processes, etc. Keywords: Logical Set

DESIGN
Computed

PLATFORM
GPL3372 SHFK GPL4989 SHFU GPL4990 SHGE

CITATIONS
17868458

