TITLE
Comparative miRNome analysis of bovine sera and exosomes revealing their distinct advantages in studying cattle health

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
Recently, extra-cellular components, such as serum and exosome, attract more and more attention as biomarker candidates for mammalian health. However, the contribution of different blood components to the signature of respective microRNAs (miRNAs) remains unknown, especially in cattle. In this study we aimed to investigate the miRNAs from bovine sera and exosomes, and to provide insights into their future applications. Blood collected from four healthy dairy cows were used for this study. The sera and exosomes RNAs were extracted using two commonly used commercial kits (Norgen and Invitrogen total RNA isolation kit), respectively. Sera showed higher complexity of miRNome consisting of 328 miRNAs, while significantly less miRNAs (260, p = 0.001) were detected in exosomes. The profile of total detected miRNAs in sera and exosomes was different, while exosomes represented about 78% of total miRNAs expressed in sera, suggesting that exosomes are the major miRNAs carriers in bovine sera. There were 24 and 3 miRNAs (RPM > 5) that exclusively expressed in sera and exosomes, respectively. In addition, 12 miRNAs were differentially expressed between sera and exosomes (FDR < 0.05). Moreover, functional analysis showed that uniquely and highly expressed miRNAs in sera targeted functions of diseases and disorders, while the functions of those in exosomes were enriched in tissue development and lipid metabolism. Our results provide evidence that bovine sera and exosomes miRNomes are different with regarding to miRNA numbers, types and expressions. Based on their distinct profiles, miRNAs from sera and exosomes may reflect different aspects of physiological and pathological conditions in cattle. The functional analysis suggest that sera may be preferable for the purpose of detecting inflammation in cattle, while exosomes may be a better choice for monitoring the status of muscle development and lipid metabolism.

DESIGN
Four blood samples were collected from four healthy dairy cattle, and sera were isolated. Using serum and exosome RNA extraction kits to extract the sera and exosomes total RNA, and the microRNA expression was profiled.

PLATFORM
GPL15749 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Bos taurus)

CITATIONS
27519500

