TITLE
Transcriptome analysis of eosinophilic and noneosinophilic chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps reveals distinct lncRNA expression profiles

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: The pathogenesis of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps (CRSwNP) remains unclear. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) play pivotal roles in various biological processes, but their roles in CRSwNP have not been explored. We performed systematic transcriptome analysis of mRNAs and lncRNAs of eosinophilic and noneosinophilic CRSwNP to deepen our understanding of the disease mechanism. Methods: We analyzed expression profiles of mRNAs and lncRNAs with next-generation high-throughput RNA sequencing in patients with eosinophilic CRSwNP (n=3), noneosinophilic CRSwNP (n=3), and healthy control subjects (n=3). Results were verified by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) in an independent cohort of patients. The dysregulated mRNAs and lncRNAs were identified and characterized via bioinformatics analysis. Results: A total of 1917 novel lncRNA transcripts and 280 known lncRNA transcripts were identified. Sample groups were separated by unsupervised hierarchical clustering on differentially expressed lncRNAs or mRNAs. The qRT-PCR results of five dysregulated lncRNAs were consistent with the RNA-seq data. The dysregulated genes were significantly overrepresented in immune response and extracellular environment related terms in Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analyses. The predicted functions of dysregulated lncRNAs were highly consistent with those of dysregulated mRNAs. Conclusion: The cross talk between inflammation and immune response and microenvironment is the key pathogenesis mechanism of CRSwNP. Patients with eosinophilic CRSwNP compared with noneosinophilic CRSwNP has distinct gene expression profiles. This highlights the necessity of designing personalized therapeutic strategies and suggests developing specific molecular biomarkers. 

DESIGN
Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) removed total RNA sequencing carried out in 3 groups of samples: ECRSwNP, non-ECRSwNP, CTRL.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
27216292

