TITLE
profiling of hypothalamus from mice s.c. injected with CT-26wt colon carcinoma cells vs. PBS

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The main function of the nervous system is to maintain homeostasis by sensing and reacting to signals that reach a certain threshold. For example, the brain can sense immune peripheral events through soluble compounds or the vagus nerve and can react through activation of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis, resulting in the modulation of an ongoing immune response. Cancer progression is characterized by high mutation rates, with each mutation potentially promoting alarm signals during the 10 to 15 years of cancer development before clinical detection. It is not known, however, whether the brain can recognize the presence of a peripheral tumour, and if this recognition can be molecularly assessed. Using genome-wide expression analysis in a model of colon carcinoma, we show that a tumor growing at the periphery can indeed promote changes in the expression levels of defined sets of genes in the hypothalamus. These changes occur as early as 18 h after tumour cell injection and involve specific signalling pathways. These findings prove that cancer-derived signals are effective in eliciting specific changes in gene expression in discrete brain regions and open a question regarding the potential role of brain genes in cancer outcomes. Keywords: gene expression profile of the hypothalamus in response to peripheral tumor cells

DESIGN
We used two-color oligonucleotides in-house printed microarrays in a case-control direct design with two technical replicates in a dye swap design. We analyzed 3 different time points: 18, 72 and 192 h after tumor cells or PBS injection. We performed 5 samples (biological replicates) for 18 h and 4 samples for 72 h and 192 h time points.

PLATFORM
GPL4981 mwg-10k-1 GPL4983 mwg-10k-2 GPL4984 mwg-10k-3 GPL4985 mwg-10k-5 GPL4986 mwg-10k-6

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

