TITLE
Inflammation promotes a conversion of astrocytes into neural progenitor cells via NF-kB activation

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Brain inflammation, a common feature in neurodegenerative diseases, is a complex series of events, which can be detrimental and even lead to neuronal death. Nonetheless, several studies suggest that inflammatory signals are also positively influencing neural cell proliferation, survival, migration and differentiation. Recently, correlative studies suggested that astrocytes are able to dedifferentiate upon injury, and may thereby re-acquire neural stem cells (NSC) potential. However, the mechanism underlying this dedifferentiation process upon injury remains unclear. In this study, we find that during the early response of reactive gliosis, inflammation induces a conversion of mature astrocytes into neural progenitors. A TNF treatment induces the decrease of specific astrocyte markers, such as GFAP or genes related to glycogen metabolism, while a subset of these cells re-express immaturity markers, such as CD44, Musashi-1 and Oct4. Thus, TNF treatment results in the appearance of cells that exhibit a neural progenitor phenotype and are able to proliferate and differentiate into neurons and/or astrocytes. This dedifferentiation process is maintained as long as TNF is present in the culture medium. In addition, we identify a role for Oct4 in this process, since the TNF-induced dedifferentiation can be prevented by inhibiting Oct4 expression. Our results show that activation of the NF-kB pathway through TNF plays an important role in the dedifferentiation of astrocytes via the re-expression of Oct4. These findings indicate that the first step of reactive gliosis is in fact a dedifferentiation process of resident astrocytes mediated by the NF-kB pathway.    This dedifferentiation process is maintained as long as TNF is present in the culture medium. In addition, we identify a role for Oct4 in this process, since the TNF-induced dedifferentiation can be prevented by inhibiting Oct4 expression. Our results show that activation of the NF-kB pathway through TNF plays an important role in the dedifferentiation of astrocytes via the re-expression of Oct4. These findings indicate that the first step of reactive gliosis is in fact a dedifferentiation process of resident astrocytes mediated by the NF-kB pathway.

DESIGN
Cultures of primary mouse astrocytes were treated with TNF (50 ng/mL) for 24 hours. Cells were collected and immediately homogenized in cooled down RNA NOW reagent (OZYME). Total RNA was extracted according to RNA NOW manufacturer's recommendations with -20C overnight incubation for small RNA precipitation. Total RNA integrity and purity were assessed using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer and RNA 6000 Nano LabChip kits (Agilent Technologies). Only good-quality RNA (no contamination or degradation, RIN > 9) was used and further processed. Total RNA samples were reverse-transcribed to double-stranded cDNA using specific primers, which reduce the priming of rRNA. cRNA was generated by in vitro transcription and reverse transcribed into a sense single-stranded cDNA. The cDNA was fragmented, labeled, and hybridized onto Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Arrays according to the Ambion Whole Transcript Expression kit for Affymetrix GeneChip Whole Transcript Expression Array Protocol (P/N 4425209 Rev.B 05/2009) and GeneChip WT Terminal Labeling and Hybridization User Manual for use with the Ambion Whole Transcript Expression kit (P/N 702808 Rev.6). Microarrays were then washed, stained, and scanned according to the manufacturer's instructions. The samples cover two conditions (TNF and Control), with three replicates per condition.

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
26381429 , 26981349

