TITLE
Experimental evolution of a hyperthermophilic archaeon on carbon monoxide enhanced hydrogen productivity through novel mechanisms associated with genome, transcriptome and epigenome changes

ORGANISM
Thermococcus onnurineus NA1

SUMMARY
A hyperthermophilic archaeonf Thermococcus onnurineus NA1 can grow and produce H2 on a variety of CO-containing feed stocks such as by-product gas generated from steel-mill process. In this study we applied a long-term adaptive evolution to enhance H2 productivity. Through serial transfer of cell cultures with carbon monoxide (CO) as an energy source, we observed physiological changes in cell density, CO consumption rate and H2 production rate. To understand the underlying mechanism for the changes, we performed systems analysis of genomic, transcriptomic and epigenomic data. Genomic analysis of an evolved strain, designated as 156T, revealed that single or multiple bases were substituted, deleted or inserted in the sequence of the parental strain. A single point mutation in a putative transcriptional regulator (TON_1525) seemed to play a pivotal role in changing cellular phenotypes by increasing the expression level of genes of a CO dehydrogenase-hydrogenase gene cluster. Additionally, a mutation in an aromatic amino acid permease (TON_0820) contributed to increasing cell growth. Transcriptomic analysis revealed that genes belonging to the categories of transcription, translation and energy metabolism in archaeal Clusters of Orthologous Genes (arCOGs) were significantly changed. In particular, genes involved in energy conservation via CO oxidation were highly upregulated. Epigenomic analysis suggested that methylation change might be a way of gene regulation in a hyperthermophilic archaeon. The evolved 156T strain showed highly enhanced hydrogen productivity with CO at high flow rates of 800 ml min-1 and above, indicating the adaptation rendered the strain less sensitive to high CO. The 156T strain was demonstrated to be appropriate for H2 production by using synthetic gas obtained by coal gasification. This study is the first example to show that evolutionary engineering is very effective in enhancing H2 productivity of a hyperthermophilic archaeon on CO

DESIGN
RNA expreesion profile of adaptive T. onnurineus NA1 genes in CO-containing media, using Illumina HiSeq 2500

PLATFORM
GPL19533 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Thermococcus onnurineus NA1)

CITATIONS
26975345

