TITLE
DNA methylation profiling of blood monocytes in obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) patients: Effect of positive airway pressure (PAP) treatment.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a highly prevalent condition that is associated with a wide range of long-term morbidities including metabolic, cardiovascular, and cognitive alterations, possibly via activation of systemic inflammatory and oxidative stress pathways. Implementation of positive airway pressure (PAP) is the first line treatment for OSA. However, the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying OSA-induced morbidities and their response to PAP treatment remain unclear. Methods And Results: DNA methylation profiles were examined in blood monocytes of OSA patients before and after PAP treatment. We identified 1,847 regions showing significant differential DNA methylation (p < 0.001 and MAT score > 4) between the groups. Analysis of biochemical pathways and gene networks demonstrated that differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were associated with immune responses, and particularly with mechanisms governing gene regulation by peroxisome proliferation-activated receptors (PPAR). Single locus quantitative PCR analysis revealed that DNA methylation was increased at the PPAR responsive elements (PPAREs) of 8 genes in the post-treatment samples, suggesting that PAP treatment leads to an increase in DNA methylation at PPAREs, possibly affecting the binding of the PPARG complex and downstream gene expression. Conclusions: Our work provides initial evidence of epigenetic regulation particularly involving metabolic pathways in OSA patients that are responsive to PAP treatment. We postulate that differentially methylated regions in blood monocytes may serve as potential biomarkers in clinical practice.

DESIGN
Blood monocyte samples from 6 OSA patients were analyzed by MeDIP coupled to microarray analysis: Blood monocytes were collected from the same group of patients before (PRE group, n=6) and after (POST group, n=6) CPAP treatment.

