TITLE
TGFβ confers resistance to radiotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Radiotherapy is standard of care for inoperable non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) but  adenocarcinoma NSCLC respond more poorly than squamous cell NSCLC. Transforming  growth factor β (TGFβ) activity is induced by radiation and plays a recently recognized role in  the DNA damage response. Here we show in murine lung tumor model that radiation activates  TGFβ acutely and persistently and that TGFβ neutralizing antibody, 1D11, systemic treatment  increased tumor control following either fractionated or single high dose radiation regimes.  TGFβ dependent genes in the irradiated tumor indicated crosstalk between innate and adaptive  immunity but therapeutic benefit of 1D11 in irradiated tumors in immunocompromised mice  suggested that innate immune cells are more influential than the adaptive immune response.  Irradiated tumors in which TGFβ was blocked were highly hypoxic, exhibit pronounced  microvascular damage and promoted neither cancer-associated fibroblasts nor recruit bone  marrow derived cells (BMDC). Tumor educated immature BMDC were significant sources of  TGFβ and inhibiting BMDC recruitment achieved tumor growth control in response to RT  comparable to TGFβ inhibition. Thus, radiation-induced TGFβ both compromises tumor control  by RT and promotes reestablishment of the tumor microenvironment. Concordant with the  critical role of TGFβ activity in RT, radiation resistant NSCLC adenocarcinomas exhibit higher  TGFβ activity compared to squamous cell NSCLC, which suggests a rationale for using TGFβ  inhibition to augment radiotherapy.

DESIGN
Lewis lung cancer (LLC) model were established in  6 to 8 week-old C57BL/6 female mice by subcutaneous injection. When tumors were 60-80 mm3, Mice were randomized to achieve comparable mean tumor size for each treatment group as indicated below.  Tumor growth were monitored and tumors were collected and characterized by gene expression profiling and immunostaining.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

