TITLE
Single-cell transcriptome profiling for metastatic renal cell carcinoma patient-derived cells [aCGH]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) initiated from the renal epithelium is the most prevalent histological type of adult kidney cancers. Dissecting intratumoral heterogeneity (ITH) of ccRCC has leveraged to extend our knowledge on how primary tumors harboring driver mutations evolve and spread to other sites. The cellular fractions within and across the primary (pRCC) and metastatic RCC (mRCC) are heterogeneous in both their genetic and biological features determining the variability in clinical aggressiveness and sensitivity to the therapy. To achieve sustainable therapeutic benefit with targeted agents in mRCC, the effective target should focus on signaling pathways that are related to driver mutations occurred early in the clonal evolution of the disease and thus should be common to primary tumor and metastatic sites. Considering that extensive genetic heterogeneity may result in drug response variability among patients and treatment resistance, the tailored strategies for metastatic RCC is urgently needed. Here, we analyze single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) data from a matched primary RCC (pRCC) and lung metastasis (mRCC) to dissect ITH at the highest resolution to date with the objective of discovering the better therapeutic regimen.

DESIGN
In order to identify successful clonal propagation from patient to PDX samples and understand pathogenesis from primary to metastatic RCC, we performed whole-exome sequencing (WES, n=4) and matched aCGH (n=4) on bulk tumor samples. And we utilized single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to model and dissect functional heterogeneity acroass primary and metastatic RCC tumors. We checked whether of capturing live one cell, not more cells, in microfluidics by fluorescent microscopic observation. To construct RNA sequencing libraries, we performed further quality controls including adequate quantities and qualities of amplified transcriptomes respectively from single cells. Tumor cells from the parental mRCC (n=34), PDX-mRCC (n=36) and PDX-pRCC (n=46) were finally analyzed in this study after filtering out poor quality cells.

PLATFORM
GPL10150 Agilent-022060 SurePrint G3 Human CGH Microarray 4x180K (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
27139883

