TITLE
Expression data from non-infected and Salmonella Typhimurium infected mesenteric lymph nodes

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
A first generation Affymetrix GeneChip® Porcine genome array was used to profile the gene expression in porcine mesenteric lymph nodes over a time course of infection with S. Typhimurium, including the acute (8 hours post inoculation (hpi), 24 hpi, 48 hpi) and chronic (21 days post-inoculation (dpi)) stages of infection. Our objectives were to 1) identify and examine the stereotypical gene expression response within host MLN to S. Typhimurium infection, 2) characterize global host responses by revealing the specific features of the host’s innate immunity pathways, and 3) explore if and how S. Typhimurium may escape the host immune response and develop into a carrier state. Our study has attempted to investigate the features of host gene expression profiling during S. Typhimurium infection at the acute and chronic infection stages and to explore the mechanism by which S. Typhimurium can escape from the host immune response and develop a carrier state in the host. In conclusion, by using the Affymetrix porcine GeneChip, 848 differentially expressed genes were identified in porcine MLN during infection and several specific features of host response were revealed by gene cluster and pathway analysis. Our data are the first report to investigate global host responses to S. Typhimurium in porcine MLN, and this new study provides data applicable for studying enteric salmonellosis of pigs, as well as humans. Keywords: time course

DESIGN
Fifteen piglets from Salmonella spp.-free sows were weaned at 10 days (d) of age, shipped to the National Animal Disease Center, Ames, IA and raised in isolation facilities. To confirm that all piglets were free of Salmonella spp. prior to challenge, bacteriological cultures were performed on rectal swabs twice. Seven week old pigs were randomly divided into 2 groups, 3 non-infected pigs and 12 infected pigs. Three non-infected control pigs were necropsied 2 days prior to experimental infection. On day 0, pigs in the infected groups were intranasally challenged with 1 billion CFU of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. Three infected pigs were necropsied at 8 hours post-inoculation (hpi), 24 hpi, 48 hpi and 21 days post-inoculation (dpi). Tissue samples from the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN) were collected and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for RNA isolation.

PLATFORM
GPL3533 [Porcine] Affymetrix Porcine Genome Array

CITATIONS
17499962

