TITLE
Thymic Epithelial Cells  with Human T cell Leukemia Virus type 1 (HTLV-1) Infected T cell supernatant (with or without supernatant)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The human T-lymphotropic virus type-1 (HTLV-1) is the cause of adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) and HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spatic paraparesis (HAM/TSP). Both diseases have a late onset, although ATL has a medium survivor of 7.7 months after the onset despise aggressive treatment. T CD4+ cells are the main target of HTLV-1, but other cells types are known to be infected as T CD8+, CD34+ progenitor, dendritic cells and immature lymphocytes. The thymus gland is a primary lymphoid organ, in which the lymphocytes undergo differentiation, where selected T cell ultimately being exported from the organ and going to peripheral lymphoid organs. This process occurs along with immature lymphocyte migration and interaction with thymic microenvironment. Thymic epithelial cells (TECs) are the main component of the thymic stroma and are responsible for the process of intrathymic T cell maturation. This process are dependent of T cell receptor (TCR)-mediated recognition of antigenic peptide fragments presented by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules in TEC and culminate in TCR repertoire formation. In this study, we show that TECs have the receptors for HTLV-1 entry and can be infected by cell-cell contact and cell-free virus. These cells change gene expression of anti-apoptosis, chemokine and adhesion molecules genes; however, there is no difference in antigen presentation molecules. Furthermore, HTLV-1 infected TECs can transmit the virus to a CD4 T cell lineage and CD4 T cells derived from peripheral blood of healthy donors after in vitro co-cultivation. Conjointly, our data points to the possibility that the human thymic epithelial cells must favor the HTLV-1 infection as a reservoir, transmitting the virus to maturing lymphocytes that cause the disease in the periphery.

DESIGN
We used non-treated Thymic Epithelial Cell (TEC) and TEC treated with non-infected T cell supernatant (CEM). We analyze three independent samples (biological replicates) for each conditions (total 2 conditions) and also technical replicates using dye-swap. In total we use 1.5 slides with 4 array in each.

PLATFORM
GPL6480 Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K G4112F (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

