TITLE
Decorin and EphA2 mediate Carcinoembryonic Antigen Cell Adhesion Molecule 1-L inhibition of colorectal cancer metastasis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Objective  We have previously shown that expression of the CEACAM1 long isoform (CC1-L) in metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) cells results in significant inhibition of liver metastasis via Chemokine (C-C motif) Ligand 2 (CCL2) and Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling.  Yet, despite recent advances in identifying molecules involved in the CC1-L inhibition of metastasis, much remains to be elucidated regarding the molecular mechanisms orchestrating this pathway.   Design We performed an untargeted transcript profiling and a phosphokinase screen between CC1-L-expressing and non-expressing (CT) CRC cells.  Identified targets were validated in vitro and in vivo for their involvement in signaling and invasion or metastasis.  We validated our conclusions in CRC patient cohorts for time to metastasis development and long-term survival.  Results Untargeted transcript profiling revealed high Decorin (Dcn) expression in CC1-L-expressing cells versus CT cells.  Decorin was detected at the peri-endothelial layers of large blood vessels and in liver stellate cells.  In metastatic lesions, it was expressed in pericyte-like cells covering capillary endothelium.  Phosphokinase differential screening revealed reduced Ephrin type-A receptor 2 (EphA2) expression and activity in CC1-L- versus CT-expressing cells.  Treatment of CT cells with recombinant Dcn led to decreased migration and invasion and decreased EphA2-mediated Erk and Akt signaling.  CRC patients exhibiting high CC1 and DCN expression, in combination with low EPHA2 expression, benefit from longer 10-year survival than those with high EPHA2 expression.    Conclusion  CC1-L expression in poorly differentiated CRC inhibits liver metastasis through increased Decorin expression and EphA2-mediated signaling.

DESIGN
Quadriplicate samples of each mouse colon cancer cell lines (control cells versus those expressing either short or long isoform of CEACAM1) have been used for RNA extraction

