TITLE
Gene expression profiling of mice given orally a supplement with special amino acid composition of Vespa larval saliva origin (DW vs CAAM)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
VAAM stands for an amino acid mixture simulating the composition of Vespa, a hornet larval saliva. We conducted a comparative study on metabolism-regulatory roles of VAAM, casein-simulating amino acid mixture (CAAM), and pure water on murine hepatic and adipose tissue transcriptomes. Mice were orally fed VAAM solution ( 0.675 g/ kg BW = 2% of food-derived amino acids = 0.38% of total food energy/ day), CAAM solution ( 0.675 g / kg BW/ day) or water under ad libitum for five days. Hepatic transcriptome comparison of VAAM, CAAM and water-treated groups revealed a VAAM-specific regulation of the metabolic pathway, i.e., the down-regulation of glycolysis and fatty acid oxidation, and up-regulation of poly unsaturated fatty acid synthesis and glycogenic amino acids utilization in TCA cycle. Similar transcriptomic analysis of white and brown adipose tissues (WAT and BAT) suggested the up-regulation of phospholipid synthesis in WAT and the negative regulation of cellular processes in BAT. Because these coordinated regulations of tissue transcriptomes implicated the presence of upstream signaling common to these tissues, we conducted Ingenuity Pathways Analysis of these transcriptomes with the results that estrogenic and glucagon signals seemed to be activated in liver and WAT as well as beta-adrenergic signaling did in the three tissues by administration of VAAM. Our data provide a clue to understanding the role of VAAM in metabolic regulation of multiple tissues.

DESIGN
Mice were divided randomly into three groups, VAAM, CAAM or water administered group. VAAM, CAAM or water was orally administrated five times once a day using feeding tube. The dosage of 1.8%VAAM, 1.8%CAAM or water was 37.5 microliter per gram of body weight. On day of last administration, food was removed and mice were moved to clean cages at 8:00. The last administrations started at 10:00. At 4 hours later after last administration, mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation to collect blood, liver, white adipose tissue (WAT) and brown adipose tissue (BAT). Small hepatic pieces were immersed into RNAlater. WAT and BAT were frozen immediately after extraction using liquid nitrogen. All samples were extracted total RNA and hybridized on Affymetrix microarrays.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
27551322

