TITLE
Expression profiles during cell death programmed by a restriction-modification system in E. coli

ORGANISM
Escherichia coli

SUMMARY
Genetically programmed deaths play important roles in the biology of unicellular prokaryotic cells. Some gene complexes force their maintenance on the host bacterial cells by killing cells that have lost them. This form of programmed death called post-segregational killing or genetic addiction is brought about by several Type II restriction-modification gene complexes, through restriction attack on the undermethylated chromosome, and underlie their behavior as selfish mobile elements. To learn the genetic steps to death, we examined how carriage and loss of PaeR7I restriction-modification gene complex affect host Escherichia coli cells through transcriptome and experimental analyses. The PaeR7I complex was on a temperature-sensitive plasmid so that the killing was induced by a temperature shift. We used microarrays to detail the global program of gene expression underlying cell death process mediated by PaeR7I restriction-modification system in E. coli. Keywords: time course

DESIGN
Post-segregational cell killing was induced by blocking replication of a temperature sensitive plasmid carrying PaeR7I RM gene complex by shifting up the cultivation temperature. At 30℃, the permissive temperature for the plasmid replication, growth as monitored by OD660, of MG1655/pTN9 (r+m+) was indistinguishable from those of MG1655/pTN11 (r-m+) and MG1655/pHSG415 (vector). Cell death was observed at least 4 h after the temperature shift only in MG1655/pTN9 (r+m+) as in the previous works; the increase in viable cell counts stopped and resulted in decrease of cell viability. To analyze global gene expression when cells went to death, we performed transcriptome analysis 0 h, 1h, 1 h 50 min, and 3h after the temperature shift.  We used Affimetrix E. coli antisense genome array. Experiments were performed independently twice.

PLATFORM
GPL199 [Ecoli_ASv2] Affymetrix E. coli Antisense Genome Array

CITATIONS
19304752

