TITLE
Gene expression profile of TIARP-deficient macrophages or neutrophils, compared with WT macrophages or neutrophils

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
[Background] TNFa-induced adipose-related protein (TIARP) is a six-transmembrane protein that is expressed on macrophages, neutrophils and synoviocytes. We have recently reported that TIARP deficient mice (TIARP-/-) spontaneously developed arthritis, and had the high susceptibility to collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) with enhanced interleukin (IL)-6 production. However, the effect of TIARP to neutrophils and fibroblast-like syonoviocytes (FLS) has not been clearly elucidated. [Methods] We analyzed the roles of TIARP in K/BxN serum transfer model using TIARP-/- mice. We characterized the differences of neutrophils between WT and TIARP-/- mice by DNA microarray. Transmigration assays of TIARP-/- neutrophils were performed in vitro and in vivo. FLS were cultured with TNFα and the production of CXCL2 (a specific ligand of CXCR1 and CXCR2) and IL-6 were measured by ELISA. Moreover, TIARP-/- mice transferred with K/BxN serum were treated with anti-IL-6R antibodies. [Results] Arthritis in TIARP-/- mice transferred with K/BxN serum was significantly exacerbated. We identified overexpression of CXCR1 and CXCR2 in TIARP-/- neutrophils by DNA microarray. Neutrophils from TIARP-/- mice showed strong migration activity. The enhancement of chomotactic activity of TIARP-/- neutrophil was greatly facilitated by CXCL2 in vitro and in vivo. In addition, TIARP-/-FLS has enhanced the production of CXCL2 and IL-6 and the cell proliferation in the presence of TNFa, and the blockade of IL-6R significantly attenuated arthritis in vivo. [Conclusion] Our findings indicate that TIARP might down-regulate the production of CXCL2 and IL-6 in FLS, and the expression of chemokine receptors (CXCR1 and CXCR2) in neutrophils, resulting in the protective ability of neutrophils migration into arthritic joints.

DESIGN
Mice were treated with thiogycollate medium intraperitoneally. After 3 days, peritoneal macrophages were isolated from three WT or TIARP-deficient mice, and these cells were stimulated by TNFα for 24 hours. Ly6G+ Neutrophils were isolated from splenocytes by MACS.

PLATFORM
GPL10787 Agilent-028005 SurePrint G3 Mouse GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

