TITLE
Diversity in Modulation of Interferon Stimulated Genes by Dobrava, Kurkino, and Sochi Genotypes of Dobrava-Belgrade Hantavirus in comparison to Tula Virus

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
We used an in vitro model to study the impact of hantavirus infection on the cellular gene expression profile. To do so, A549 cells were infected with pathogenic DOBV genotypes Dobrava, Kurkino, and Sochi and less-pathogenic TULV . A549 cells were chosen because of their high susceptibility towards hantavirus infection and because many fundamental studies on hantavirus biology and on host gene expression changes following infection have been performed with this cell line. Cells were infected at a high multiplicity of infection of 5 focus forming units (FFU) per cell to guarantee uniform infection of all cells. Total RNA from infected and mock-infected control cells was isolated at 12 h post infection. This point of time was chosen to allow enough time for establishment of infection and progression to early viral gene expression but to avoid the risk of missing gene expression changes associated with the onset of the cellular innate immune response towards infection. The distinct modulation of cellular transcription of A549 cells was analyzed by means of a whole genome cRNA microarray. All experiments were performed in duplicate using RNA samples from two independently infected cell cultures for each analysis. To compare the gene expression profiles, ratios were calculated by dividing the merged normalized signal intensities of infected samples by mock-control signal intensities. Genes that exhibited a ≥2-fold change (FC) in gene expression  and signal intensities that were significantly above the background with p-values ≤ 0.01 were chosen for further analysis. The successful infection of A549 cells with all viruses and the uniform progression of infection were confirmed by immunofluorescence microscopy of cells infected in parallel. At 12 h post infection with each virus nearly all cells were infected without showing cytopathic effects. Since different clinical courses are caused by infection with distinct DOBV genotypes, genotype-specific regulation of cellular transcripts were investigated that may be crucial for pathogenesis in vitro. Selected infection regulated candidates were verified by qPCR at different time points after infection.

DESIGN
We analyzed the gene expression profile of A549 cells wich were either mock-infected or infected with Dobrava Virus (DOBV) Dobrava, Kurkino or Sochi, or with Tula Virus (TULV) at a multiplicity of infection of 5. Experiments were performed in duplicate. At 12 h post infection total RNA was isolated from infected cells and used for microarray analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL13607 Agilent-028004 SurePrint G3 Human GE 8x60K Microarray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
27058765

