TITLE
Whole genome amplification effect on segmental copy-number changes and copy-number neutral loss of heterozygosity analysis by oligonucleotide-based array-comparative genome hybridization

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Insufficient quantities of human genomic DNA are a limiting factor for many clinical applications. Whole genome amplification (WGA) is an approach designed to overcome small amount of DNA for genome-wide genetic tests as it allows amplification of the entire genome from picogram or nanogram quantities of DNA. Various strategies of WGA have been developed; however, none of them can guarantee the absence of amplification bias. High-quality genome-representative amplified DNA is crucial for WGA use in basic research and clinical genetics. Thus, systematic evaluation of WGA effect on downstream methods is necessary. Results: In this paper, 4 multiple displacement amplification (MDA) -based and 2 PCR-based WGA kits were compared in their effect on segmental copy-number changes as well as copy-number neutral loss of heterozygosity detection by high-density oligonucleotide DNA arrays. We described outcomes and limits for each individual WGA; however, the main goal of this study was chiefly to show a general compatibility and features specific for particular WGA strategy. The main outcomes are as follows: 1) MDA-based WGAs showed higher tendency to generate false positive imbalances in contrast to PCR-based WGAs with higher risk of false negativity; 2) the specific risk of false positivity and/or negativity increased with decreasing copy-number segments size; 3) single-cell WGAs showed significantly worse effect on results in comparison to WGAs with nanogram level of DNA as input; 4) PCR-based WGAs were not compatible with copy-number neutral loss of heterozygosity analysis based on single nucleotide polymorphisms in restriction digestion sites and also showed higher risk of copy-number neutral loss of heterozygosity false negativity if combined with analysis based on simple hybridization. Conclusions: This study gives a comprehensive insight into the WGA effect on DNA array analysis. The results of this study help to choose WGA according to individual user requirements and options. Moreover, we show a strategy to verify and validate segmental copy-number changes detection by DNA array protocol including any WGA for any purpose to attain the highest efficiency without an unnecessary WGA bias.

DESIGN
6 WGAs were tested and compared to unamplified control by 3 aCGH platforms. Experiments were performed in duplicates. Taken together, 42 hybridizations were done.

PLATFORM
GPL5477 Agilent-014950 Human Genome CGH Microarray 4x44K (Feature Number version) GPL11358 Agilent-029830 Human Genome CGH + SNP Microarray (Feature Number version) GPL20960 Agilent-029002 Human CytoSure ISCA UPD Array, 4×180K

CITATIONS
Mikulasova A, Smetana J, Wayhelova M, Janyskova H, Okubote SA, Hajek R, Kuglik P. Whole genome amplification effect on segmental copy-number changes and copy-number neutral loss of heterozygosity analysis by oligonucleotide-based array comparative genomic hybridization in human myeloma cell line. 2016. Int. J. Clin. Exp. Pathol. 9(7): 6965-6976. ISSN 1936-2625. WOS:000381729200036

