TITLE
Modulation of the ileal microbiota by green tea in broiler

ORGANISM
chicken gut metagenome

SUMMARY
The effects of increasing addition of green tea in dietary changes the bacterial populations in broiler ileum were evaluated. Four hundreds of AA broilers were randomly assigned to four groups with green tea addition of 0, 0.5, 1 and 2 percent in the diet. The body weight showed no difference but a digital increase positively correlated with addition of green tea. The content of green tea had a linear effect of lengthening the ileum villi. The barcoded DNA pyrosequencing method was used to reveal 15 phyla, 1157phylotypes and 3098 16S operational taxonomic units (OTUs). The most predominant bacterial phyla were Firmicutes (56.89%), Actinobacteria (30.58%), Proteobacteria (8.61%) and Bacteroidetes (2.72%). As the proportion of additional green tea increased, the abundance of phylum Actinobacteria (p=0.003) and Proteobacteria (p=0.049) almost linearly increased, while the proportion of Firmicutes (p=0.027) linearly decreased. Only 2 OTUs were significantly affected by the increased additive, Corynebacteriaceae (p=0.011) and Staphylococcaceae (p= 0.006). Triplot analysis suggested that the dominant phyla of Verrucomicrobia, TM7 and Actinobacteria were clearly related to the addition of green tea. Moreover, green tea addition influenced the construction of microbiota, and lengthened the villus in ileum by Monte Carlo permutation test. These findings provide a new understanding of the ileal microbial ecology, which may be useful in modulating the gut microbiome, and also the proper usage of powdered green tea.

DESIGN
On  d 42 of the experiment, following a 12-h fast, 3 broilers from each group were randomly selected and weighted, then subjected to slaughter according to the Welfare of Animal Slaughter Regulations of China.

PLATFORM
GPL20961 454 GS FLX Titanium (chicken gut metagenome)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

