TITLE
MiROvaR, a microRNA-based predictor of early relapse for ovarian cancer patients [validation set; OC133]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Despite a pathological complete response, risk-of-relapse remains a challenge for most of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) patients and an ad-hoc predictor can be a valuable clinical tool. We developed a 35 miRNAs-based predictor of Risk of Ovarian Cancer Relapse (MiROvaR) using a training set of patients from MITO-2 (Multicentre Italian Trials in Ovarian Cancer-2; Pignata S et al. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Sep 20). MiROvaR performance was confirmed in two independent validation cohorts.

DESIGN
Fresh frozen samples were collected from a series of 133 consecutive ovarian cancer patients  who underwent primary surgery at  CRO, National Cancer Institute (Aviano, Italy) and were profiled on Illumina platform at INT-Milan. Ethical Statement: All of the patients  whose biological samples were included in the study, gave their signed consent to donate the tissues remaining after the diagnostic procedures for research purposes. The study was approved by the Independent Ethics Committee of the Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori di Milano (INT-MI) where the miRNA profile was performed.   Clinical codes:  Age (years)  Histology: according to International Federation of Gynecological and Obstetrics guidelines ( 1: Serous; 2: Mucinous; 3: Endometrioid; 4: Undifferentiated; 5: Clear cell; 6: Mixed or other; NA:  Missing information)  Stage: according to International Federation of Gynecological and Obstetrics guidelines  Grading: according to WHO (BL: border line; G1: well differentiated; G2: moderately differentiated; G3: poorly differentiated; undiff: undifferentiated; NA: missing information)  Debulking: NED: not evident disease; mRD: minimal residual disease ( < 1cm) ; GRD: gross residual disease ( > 1cm); NO: not operated; NA: missing information  Time to relapse (TTR, months) code: 0=no relapse; 1=relapse  Overall survival (OS, months) code: 0=alive; 1=dead

PLATFORM
GPL8179 Illumina Human v2 MicroRNA expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

