TITLE
miRNA-99 family diverges physiological cardiac hypertrophy to pathological cardiac hypertrophy

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Purpose: The physiological cardiac hypertrophy is an adaptive condition that does not associate with myocyte cell death while pathological hypertrophy is a maladaptive condition associated with myocyte cell death. Alpha-2 macroglobulin (α-2M) an acute phase protein induces cardiac hypertrophy via the ERK1,2 and PI3K/Akt signaling. This study is aimed at exploring the miRNome of α-2M induced hypertrophied cardiomyocytes and to understand the role of miRNAs in determination of pathological and physiological hypertrophy. Methods: Hypertrophy was induced in H9c2 cardiomyoblasts using alpha-2 macroglobulin. The induction of hypertrophy is confirmed by microscopy and gene expression studies. Subsequently, the total RNA was isolated and small RNA sequencing was executed in Illumina HiSeq 2000. Results: Analysis of small RNA reads revealed the differential expression of a large set of miRNAs during hypertrophy. Among the differentially expressed candidates, miR-99 family (miR-99a, miR-99b and miR-100) showed significant downregulation upon α-2M treatment while isoproterenol treatment (pathological hypertrophy) upregulated their expression. The binding site for Egr1 transcription factor was identified in the promoter region of miR-99 family, and interestingly all miRNAs with Egr1 binding site proven by ChIP-Seq were downregulated during physiological hypertrophy Conclusions: The results proved Egr-1 mediated regulation of miR-99 family determines the uniqueness of pathological and physiological hypertrophy. Upregulated miR-99 expression during pathological hypertrophy suggests that it can be a valuable diagnostic marker and potential therapeutic target for cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure.

DESIGN
Small RNA profiles of control and hypertrophied cardiomyocyte H9c2 cells were generated by deep sequencing using Illumina HiSeq 2000

PLATFORM
GPL14844 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Rattus norvegicus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

LIBSTRATS
:MIRNA-SEQ
