TITLE
Unique inflammatory transcriptome profiles at the maternal fetal interface and onset of human preterm and term birth

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Preterm birth is a main determinant of neonatal mortality and morbidity and a major contributor to the overall mortality and burden of disease. However, precise phenotyping of the preterm birth is hampered by the imprecise definition of the clinical phenotype and complexity of the molecular phenotype due to multiple pregnancy tissue types and molecular processes that may contribute to the preterm birth. The study’s aim was to comprehensively evaluate the mRNA transcriptome that characterizes preterm and term labor using precisely phenotyped samples. Expression profiles of 73 genes and non-coding RNA sequences uniquely identified the four groups of patients: delivering preterm with (PL) and without labor (PNL), term with (TL) and without labor (TNL).  The largest differences in gene expression among the four groups occurred in decidua, chorion and amnion. The gene expression profiles showed suppression of chemokines expression in TNL, withdrawal of this suppression in TL, activation of multiple pathways of inflammation in PL, and an immune rejection profile in PNL. The genes constituting expression signatures showed over-representation of three putative regulatory elements in their 5’ and 3’UTR regions. The results suggest that pregnancy is maintained by downregulation of chemokines at the maternal-fetal interface. Withdrawal of this downregulation results in the term birth and its overriding by the activation of multiple pathways of the immune system in the preterm birth. Complications of the pregnancy associated with impairment of placental function, which necessitated premature delivery of the fetus in the absence of labor, show gene expression patterns associated with immune rejection.

DESIGN
183 total RNA samples from 8 tissue types collected from 35 women grouped into six categories of pregnancy outcome. One microarray replicate per sample. Other Contributors: Radek Bukowski, Sam Parry and the NICHD Genomic and Proteomic Network for Preterm Birth Research

