TITLE
Identification of selective lead compounds for treatment of high-ploidy breast cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Increased ploidy is common in tumors but treatments for tumors with excess chromosome sets are not available.  Here, we characterize high-ploidy breast cancers and identify potential anticancer compounds selective for the high-ploidy state.  Among 354 human breast cancers, 10% have mean chromosome copy number exceeding 3, and this is most common in triple negative and HER2-positive types.  Women with high-ploidy breast cancers have higher risk of recurrence and death in two patient cohorts, demonstrating that it represents an important group for improved treatment.  Because high-ploidy cancers are aneuploid, rather than triploid or tetraploid, we devised a two-step screen to identify selective compounds.  The screen was designed to assure both external validity on diverse karyotypic backgrounds and specificity for high-ploidy cell types.  This screen identified novel therapies specific to high-ploidy cells.  First, we discovered 8-azaguanine, an antimetabolite that is activated by hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT), suggesting an elevated gene-dosage of HPRT in high-ploidy tumors can control sensitivity to this drug.  Second, we discovered a novel compound, 2,3-Diphenylbenzo[g]quinoxaline-5,10-dione (DPBQ).  DPBQ activates p53 and triggers apoptosis in a polyploid-specific manner, but does not inhibit topoisomerase or bind DNA.  Mechanistic analysis demonstrates that DPBQ elicits a hypoxia gene signature and its effect is replicated, in part, by enhancing oxidative stress.  Structure-function analysis defines the core benzo[g]quinoxaline-5,10 dione as being necessary for the polyploid-specific effects of DPBQ.  We conclude that polyploid breast cancers represent a high-risk subgroup and that DPBQ provides a functional core to develop polyploid-selective therapy.

DESIGN
Expression data from MCF7s +/- DPBQ We used microarrays to evaluate the effect of DPBQ on gene expression MCF7 cells were treated with or without DPBQ for 6 hours for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays

PLATFORM
GPL571 [HG-U133A_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
26586723

