TITLE
An embryonic atrazine exposure results in reproductive dysfunction in adult zebrafish and morphological alterations in their offspring

ORGANISM
Danio rerio

SUMMARY
The herbicide atrazine, a suspected endocrine disrupting chemical (EDC), frequently contaminates potable water supplies. Studies suggest alterations in the neuroendocrine system along the hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal axis; however, most studies address either developmental, pubertal, or adulthood exposures, with few investigations regarding a developmental origins hypothesis. In this study, zebrafish were  exposed to 0, 0.3, 3, or 30 parts per billion (ppb) atrazine through embryogenesis and then allowed to mature with no additional chemical exposure. Reproductive function, histopathology, hormone levels, offspring morphology, and the ovarian transcriptome were assessed. Embryonic atrazine exposure resulted in a significant increase in progesterone levels in the 3 and 30 ppb groups. A significant decrease in spawning and a significant increase in follicular atresia in the 30 ppb group were observed. In offspring, a decrease in the head length to body ratio in the 30 ppb group, along with a significant increase in head width to body ratio in the 0.3 and 3 ppb groups occurred. Transcriptomic alterations involved genes associated with endocrine system development and function, tissue development, and behavior. This study provides evidence to support atrazine as an EDC causing reproductive dysfunction and molecular alterations in adults exposed only during embryogenesis and morphological alterations in their offspring.

DESIGN
We treated zebrafish embryos from approximately 1 hour post fertilization through 72 hours post fertilization (embryogenesis) to 0, 0.3, 3, or 30 parts per billion atrazine. Following the 72 hour exposure period, larvae were rinsed and allowed to mature under normal conditions until adulthood (5-6 months post fertilization). At this time, zebrafish were bred weekly for three weeks in order to initiate breeding cycles. Following this peroid, gonadal tissue was dissected and processed for transcriptomic analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL20834 Agilent-060509 Zebrafish Expression Zv9 2013 (Probe name version)

CITATIONS
26891955

