TITLE
The ferric uptake regulator Fur is a potential regulator of Campylobacter jejuni acid survival and cross-protection against other stresses

ORGANISM
Campylobacter jejuni

SUMMARY
Campylobacter jejuni is a prevalent cause of bacterial gastroenteritis in humans worldwide. The mechanism by which C. jejuni survives stomach acidity remains unknown. Herein, we have demonstrated that C. jejuni with a fur deletion was more sensitive to acid than the wild-type strain. Profiling the acid stimulon of the C. jejuni ∆fur mutant allowed us to uncover Fur-regulated genes under acidic conditions. The up-regulation of heat shock genes and the down-regulation of genes involved in flagellar and cell envelope biogenesis in the fur mutant highlight the importance of Fur in Campylobacter acid survival. Interestingly, prior acid exposure of C. jejuni cross-protected the bacterium against oxidative stress. Western-blot analysis and real-time qRT-PCR revealed an increased expression of the catalase KatA in acid-stressed C. jejuni relative to unstressed bacteria. The enhanced survival of C. jejuni to oxidative stress was shown to be Fur-dependent through the regulation of katA expression. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) demonstrated that the binding affinity between Fur and katA is reduced under low pH allowing for higher expression of katA and the defense against oxidative stress. Strikingly, the ∆fur mutant exhibited a reduced virulence capacity in both human epithelial cells and G. mellonella infection model as compared to C. jejuni wild-type. Altogether, this is the first study showing that in addition to its role in iron metabolism, Fur is an important regulator of C. jejuni acid response and cross-protection against other stresses. Moreover, our results clearly demonstrate that Fur plays a substantial role in C. jejuni host pathogenesis. Campylobacter jejuni is a prevalent cause of bacterial gastroenteritis in humans worldwide. The mechanism by which C. jejuni survives stomach acidity remains unknown. Herein, we have demonstrated that C. jejuni with a fur deletion was more sensitive to acid than the wild-type strain. Profiling the acid stimulon of the C. jejuni ∆fur mutant allowed us to uncover Fur-regulated genes under acidic conditions. The up-regulation of heat shock genes and the down-regulation of genes involved in flagellar and cell envelope biogenesis in the fur mutant highlight the importance of Fur in Campylobacter acid survival. Interestingly, prior acid exposure of C. jejuni cross-protected the bacterium against oxidative stress. Western-blot analysis and real-time qRT-PCR revealed an increased expression of the catalase KatA in acid-stressed C. jejuni relative to unstressed bacteria. The enhanced survival of C. jejuni to oxidative stress was shown to be Fur-dependent through the regulation of katA expression. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) demonstrated that the binding affinity between Fur and katA is reduced under low pH allowing for higher expression of katA and the defense against oxidative stress. Strikingly, the ∆fur mutant exhibited a reduced virulence capacity in both human epithelial cells and G. mellonella infection model as compared to C. jejuni wild-type. Altogether, this is the first study showing that in addition to its role in iron metabolism, Fur is an important regulator of C. jejuni acid response and cross-protection against other stresses. Moreover, our results clearly demonstrate that Fur plays a substantial role in C. jejuni host pathogenesis.

DESIGN
Three biological with three technical replicates for both test and control samples at every pH condition

PLATFORM
GPL6293 Stintzi Lab Campylobacter jejuni 1.9k array, version 4.0

CITATIONS
26883589

