TITLE
Exposure of Campylobacter jejuni to acid stress enhances its pathogenesis and cross-protects the bacterium against other stresses

ORGANISM
Campylobacter jejuni

SUMMARY
Campylobacter jejuni is the prevalent cause of bacterial gastroenteritis in human worldwide. The ability to survive stomach acidity is a fundamental requirement for C. jejuni to colonize the host and cause disease. However, the mechanism of C. jejuni acid survival is still unknown. Herein, we demonstrated that C. jejuni is able to survive acidic conditions at pH 4 up to 8 min without a drop in viability. The acid stimulon of C. jejuni 81-176 revealed the up-regulation of many genes important for Campylobacter acid survival such as heat shock genes and genes involved in energy metabolism. On the other hand, the repression of ribosomal genes highlights the ability of C. jejuni to direct its machinery to survive stressful conditions. Prior acid exposure cross-protected C. jejuni against oxidative stress suggesting an overlap in C. jejuni’s responses to various stresses. Interestingly, the induced expression of virulence genes in C. jejuni upon acid exposure such as the Campylobacter invasion antigen (ciaB) indicates that acid stress plays a role in C. jejuni host pathogenesis. Acid exposure significantly enhanced C. jejuni pathogenesis in both eukaryotic cells and G. melonella. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study characterizes the influence of acid stress on C. jejuni pathogenesis in an infection model. Altogether, this study uncovers the transcriptional profile of C. jejuni in response to acidic conditions as those encountered in the stomach. In addition, our results demonstrate that acid stress jump-starts C. jejuni for efficient gut colonization and host pathogenesis. Campylobacter jejuni is the prevalent cause of bacterial gastroenteritis in human worldwide. The ability to survive stomach acidity is a fundamental requirement for C. jejuni to colonize the host and cause disease. However, the mechanism of C. jejuni acid survival is still unknown. Herein, we demonstrated that C. jejuni is able to survive acidic conditions at pH 4 up to 8 min without a drop in viability. The acid stimulon of C. jejuni 81-176 revealed the up-regulation of many genes important for Campylobacter acid survival such as heat shock genes and genes involved in energy metabolism. On the other hand, the repression of ribosomal genes highlights the ability of C. jejuni to direct its machinery to survive stressful conditions. Prior acid exposure cross-protected C. jejuni against oxidative stress suggesting an overlap in C. jejuni’s responses to various stresses. Interestingly, the induced expression of virulence genes in C. jejuni upon acid exposure such as the Campylobacter invasion antigen (ciaB) indicates that acid stress plays a role in C. jejuni host pathogenesis. Acid exposure significantly enhanced C. jejuni pathogenesis in both eukaryotic cells and G. melonella. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study characterizes the influence of acid stress on C. jejuni pathogenesis in an infection model. Altogether, this study uncovers the transcriptional profile of C. jejuni in response to acidic conditions as those encountered in the stomach. In addition, our results demonstrate that acid stress jump-starts C. jejuni for efficient gut colonization and host pathogenesis.

DESIGN
Three biological with three technical replicates for both test and control samples

PLATFORM
GPL6293 Stintzi Lab Campylobacter jejuni 1.9k array, version 4.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

