TITLE
Hypertrophy induced KIF5B controls mitochondrial localization and function in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Cardiac hypertrophy is associated with growth and functional changes of cardiomyocytes,including mitochondrial alterations, but the latter are still poorly understood. Here we investigated mitochondrial function and dynamic localization in neonatal rat ventricular cardiomyocytes (NRVCs) stimulated with insulin like growth factor 1 (IGF1) or phenylephrine (PE), mimicking physiological and pathological hypertrophic responses,respectively. A decreased activity of the mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) (state 3) was observed in permeabilized NRVCs stimulated with PE, whereas this was improved in IGF1 stimulated NRVCs. In contrast, in intact NRVCs, mitochondrial oxygen consumption rate (OCR) was increased in PE stimulated NRVCs, but remained constant in IGF1 stimulated NRVCs. After stimulation with PE, mitochondria localized to the periphery of the cell. To study the differences in more detail, we performed gene array studies. IGF1 and PE stimulated NRVCs did not reveal major differences in gene expression of mitochondrial encoding proteins, but we identified a gene encoding amotor protein implicated in mitochondrial localization, kinesin family member 5b (Kif5b ), which was clearly elevated in PE stimulated NRVCs but not in IGF1 stimulated NRVCs. We confirmed that Kif5b gene and protein expression was elevated in animal models with pathological cardiac hypertrophy. Silencing of Kif5b reverted the peripheral mitochondrial localization in PE stimulated NRVCs and diminished PE induced increases in mitochondrial OCR, indicating that KIF5B dependent localization affects cellular responses to PE stimulated NRVCs. These results indicate that KIF5B contributes to mitochondrial localization and function in cardiomyocytes and may play a role in pathological hypertrophic responses in vivo.

DESIGN
NRVCs were isolated from 12 neonatal (Sprague Dawley) rats of 1-3 days old.  4 control, 4 PE, and 4 IGF1 stimulated NRVCs were used and arrayed.

PLATFORM
GPL11534 [RaGene-1_1-st] Affymetrix Rat Gene 1.1 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
27094714

