TITLE
Chromatin relaxation is a feature of advanced prostate cancer  [FAIRE-Seq]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Altered patterns of transcription factor (TF) binding are now accepted as a hallmark of many aggressive cancers including prostate and breast cancers1,2. This implies that underlying global changes in chromatin accessibility may drive cancer progression, as previously hypothesized3-5. In addition there are epigenetic readers such as bromodomain containing protein 4 (BRD4), which have been shown to associate with these TFs6-8 and also to contribute to aggressive cancers of many types8,9 including prostate cancer (PC)6,10. Here we show for the first time that formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements followed by sequencing (FAIRE-seq) applied to human prostate tumors tissue can define castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) and can be used to inform the discovery of gene-level classifiers for therapy. In addition, we show that the androgen receptor (AR) overexpression alone is a primary driver for chromatin relaxation and that this effect can be reversed using bromodomain inhibitors. We also report that bromodomain-containing proteins (BRDs) are overexpressed in advanced CRPCs and that ATAD2 and BRD2 have prognostic value. In conclusion, this is the first study demonstrating a major impact of BRDs on chromatin accessibility in CRPC in patient samples. Consequently, targeting bromodomains provides a compelling rational for combination therapy in which BRD-mediated TF binding is enhanced or modified as cancer progresses. FAIRE-seq study for LNCaP and VCaP prostate cancer cell lines hormone starved or treated with R1881, and human prostate tissue samples from benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH), primary prostate cancer (PC), and castrate resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) patients.

DESIGN
2 biological replicates for prostate cancer cell lines hormone starved or treated with R1881, and 3 human prostate tissue samples from benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH), 3 primary prostate cancer (PCa), and 3 castrate resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) patients. Each sample was sequenced with an input control.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
28591577

