TITLE
The long noncoding RNA expression profile of human gallbladder carcinoma identified by microarray analysis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Gallbladder carcinoma (GBC) is the most common biliary tract cancer with poor prognosis. Increasing evidences have pointed out that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play important regulatory roles in cancer biology. The alteration of lncRNAs is associated with many kinds of cancers. However, the contribution of lncRNAs to GBC is still vague. In order to explore the potential lncRNAs involved in GBC, we described lncRNAs profiles in 3 pairs of human GBC tissues and the matched peri-carcinomatous tissues by microarray. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was used for the validation of the microarray data. To understand potential functions, Gene Ontology (GO), KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) analysis and network analysis were employed to figure out significant pathways. With abundant RNA probes, we detected 1,758 lncRNAs and 1,254 mRNAs differentially expressed in the microarray. Compared with PCT (Para-carcinoma tissue), plenty of lncRNAs were significantly up-regulated or down-regulated in GBC. Our data showed that lncRNAs down-regulated in GBC were much more than those up-regulated. Among them, RP11-152P17.2-006 was the most up-regulated, while CTA-941F9.9 was the most down-regulated. The results of qRT-PCR agreed with the data from the microarray. Pathway analysis indicated that 5 pathways were corresponded to differentially expressed transcripts. The data showed that the expression of lncRNAs in GBC was significantly changed, and a series of new lncRNAs associated with GBC were identified. These results suggested that the functions of lncRNAs might be significant in GBC development and progression.

DESIGN
Two-condition experiment, gallbladder cancer tissues vs. para-carcinoma gallbladder tissues. Biological replicates: 3 control replicates, 3 treated replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL20115 Agilent-067406 Human CBC lncRNA + mRNA microarray V4.0 (Probe name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

