TITLE
Changes in the gene expression in the inferior colliculus of the sound stimulated both control Syrian hamsters and the strain GASH:Sal.

ORGANISM
Mesocricetus auratus

SUMMARY
Using microarray analyses and subsequent verification by RT-PCR, we studied the changes in gene expression in the inferior colliculus after an ictal event in one models of audiogenic epilepsy, genetic audiogenic seizure hamster (GASH:Sal). GASH:Sal, a hamster strain developed at the University of Salamanca, exhibits genetic audiogenic epilepsy similar to human Grand Mal epilepsy. GASH:Sal shows an autosomal recessive inheritance for susceptibility to audiogenic seizures, which manifest more severely in young animals; the seizure severity progressively declines with age. Genetic animal models of epilepsy are an important tool for further understanding the basic cellular mechanisms underlying epileptogenesis and for developing novel antiepileptic drugs. We conducted a comparative study of gene expression in the inferior colliculus, a nucleus that triggers audiogenic seizures, using two animal models, the Wistar audiogenic rat (WAR) and the genetic audiogenic seizure hamster (GASH:Sal). For this purpose, both models were subjected to auditory stimulation, and 60 minutes after stimulation, the inferior colliculi were collected. As a control, intact Wistar rats and Syrian hamsters were subjected to identical stimulation and tissue preparation protocols to those performed on the experimental animals.

DESIGN
A total of 24 animals were used in this study according to the following distribution: 12 control Syrian hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus) and 12 GASH:Sal at 16 weeks of age and a body weight of approximately 60 g. Six animals Syrian and GASH:Sal hamsters, respectively, were exposed to auditory stimulation, and 60 min after the seizures, we harvested the IC for all gene expression analyses (stimulated Syrian hamsters and stimulated GASH:Sal hamsters). As controls,  other six animals Syrian and GASH:Sal hamsters, respectively,  were not exposed to the same stimulation (Syrian hamsters and GASH:Sal hamsters).

PLATFORM
GPL6246 [MoGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

