TITLE
Changes in the gene expression in the inferior colliculus of the sound stimulated rats both Wistar  and the strain susceptible to audiogenic seizures WAR

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Using microarray analyses and subsequent verification by RT-PCR, we studied the changes in gene expression in the inferior colliculus after an ictal event in one models of audiogenic epilepsy, Wistar audigenic rat (WAR). WAR is a genetically selected strain susceptible to audiogenic seizures that was inbred in the School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto (Brazil) beginning in 1990. This strain is a model of audiogenic idiopathic epilepsy that develops tonic-clonic generalized seizures. Genetic animal models of epilepsy are an important tool for further understanding the basic cellular mechanisms underlying epileptogenesis and for developing novel antiepileptic drugs. We conducted a comparative study of gene expression in the inferior colliculus, a nucleus that triggers audiogenic seizures, using two animal models, the Wistar audiogenic rat (WAR) and the genetic audiogenic seizure hamster (GASH:Sal). For this purpose, both models were subjected to auditory stimulation, and 60 minutes after stimulation, the inferior colliculi were collected. As a control, intact Wistar rats and Syrian hamsters were subjected to identical stimulation and tissue preparation protocols to those performed on the experimental animals.

DESIGN
A total of 15 animals were used in this study according to the following distribution: 9 male WAR and 6 male control rats (Rattus norvegicus, Wistar albino, Charles River Laboratories) at 12 weeks of age and a body weight of approximately 230 g. The animals were exposed to auditory stimulation, and 60 min after the seizures, we harvested the IC for all gene expression analyses. As controls, normal Wistar rats were exposed to the same stimulation according to the identical procedure. For  gene microarray (Rat Gene 1.0 ST), the rats were randomly divided into two groups, and we used both sides of the IC (ipsilateral and contralateral) from each animal: stimulated Wistar rats  and  stimulated WAR rats.

