TITLE
Expression data from the human nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell line CNE2Z transfected with AGO2 shRNAs or control shRNA

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an epithelial malignancy with striking racial and geographic distribution differences. Furthermore, numerous genetic linkage and association studies have reported a few genes contributing to the risk of this malignancy. The identification of susceptibility genes contributing to NPC would assist in predicting individual and population risk of NPC development and would help to clarify the pathogenesis relevant to this disorder. Argonaute 2 (AGO2), a central component of RNA-induced silencing complex, plays critical roles in cancer. We examined whether the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of AGO2 were related to the risk of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Twenty-five tag SNPs within AGO2 were genotyped in Guangxi population consisting of 855 NPC patients and 1036 controls. The SNPs significantly associated with NPC were further replicated in Guangdong population consisting of 996 NPC patients and 972 controls. Functional experiments were conducted to examine the biologic roles of AGO2 in NPC. A significantly increased risk of advanced lymph node metastasis of NPC was identified for the AGO2 rs3928672 GA + AA genotype compared with GG genotype in both the Guangxi and Guangdong populations. In addition, AGO2 knockdown reduced cell proliferation, induced apoptosis, and inhibited migration of NPC cells. Furthermore, gene expression microarray showed that genes altered following AGO2 knockdown were clustered in tumorigenesis and metastasis relevant pathways. Our findings suggest that the genetic polymorphism in AGO2 may be a risk factor for the advanced lymph node metastasis of NPC in Chinese populations, and AGO2 acts as an oncogene in the development of NPC.

DESIGN
The human nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell line CNE2Z was transfected with AGO2 shRNAs or control shRNA. Three biological replicates each.

