TITLE
Activating Mutation in STAT5 Is Sufficient To Drive PTCL peripheral T-Cell Lymphoma (PTCL)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Recurrent gain-of-function mutations in the transcription factor STAT5 have been detected in PTCL, an aggressive, heterogeneous disease, for which currently no targeted therapy exists. Here we investigated whether constitutive activation of STAT5 suffices to drive PTCL and whether inhibition of the JAK/STAT pathway offers a novel therapeutic opportunity in this disease. We found pronounced STAT5 expression and activity in patients from different PTCL subsets. To mimic high STAT5 activity we expressed a hyperactive STAT5A variant (termed vcS5) in the hematopoietic lineage in transgenic mice. vcS5-transgenic animals developed a lethal PTCL-like disease with full penetrance, characterized by massive expansion of CD8+ T-cells and destructive organ-infiltration. Adoptive transfer of vcS5-expressing CD8+ T-cell rapidly induced the disease in immunocompetent recipient mice. Neoplastic vcS5-T-cells displayed cytokine-hypersensitivity and showed activated, memory CD8+ T-lymphocyte characteristics. Histo-pathological analysis as well as mRNA expression profiles of vcS5 mice was closely correlated with distinct human lymphoma subtypes, including PTCL. Treatment of murine and human PTCL cell lines with the clinical JAK inhibitor Ruxolitinib or a selective STAT5 SH2 domain inhibitor induced cell death. Thus, our results demonstrate that enhanced STAT5 signaling drives PTCL development and suggest inhibition of the JAK/STAT5 pathway as a valuable therapeutic option for patients suffering from these aggressive lymphomas.

DESIGN
Total RNA extracted from wt and vcS5 (transgenic) splenocytes (2 biological replicates/sample), RNA-seq 50 bp single-end libraries sequenced on HiSeq 2000 (Illumina), to compare gene expression profiles

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

