TITLE
Gene expression profiling of chickpea responses to high-salinity stress

ORGANISM
Cicer arietinum

SUMMARY
‘Pulsechip’, a boutique cDNA microarray, generated from a set of chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.) unigenes, grasspea (Lathyrus sativus L.) ESTs and lentil (Lens culinaris Med.) resistance gene analogs, was employed to generate an expression profile of chickpea accessions tolerant and susceptible to high-salinity stress. Two groups of a tolerant and susceptible accession were challenged with high-salinity stress. The experiments were performed in three biological replications. The experiments were conducted in reference design where respective tissues from unstressed plants served as control. The leaf/shoot and root tissues were collected at 24 and 48 h post-treatment (hpt) and used for hybridization to measure changes in RNA abundance of treatment vs. control. The tissues from five experimental replicate plants per biological replication were pooled together (shoot and root tissues separate for each time point) before RNA extraction. This RNA was used to prepare cDNA targets for expression analysis using microarray. The microarray had six technical replicate spots per EST. The transcript level for each EST/cDNA was firstly calculated as the average intensity of the six technical replicates and then the average intensity of three biological replicates. Data analysis included LOWESS normalization (LOcally WEighted polynomial regreSSion) to adjust for differences in quantity of initial RNA, labeling and detection efficiencies. A dye swap in one biological replicate adjusted dye bias, if any. The Differentially Expressed (DE) ESTs were identified as those with a 95% confidence interval for mean fold change (FC) that extended beyond the two-fold cut-off and also passed the Students t test (P < 0.05) and FDR correction. These cut-offs translate into induced ESTs having a log2 ratio > 1 and repressed ESTs a ratio of < -1. The analysis consisted of three fold comparison. Firstly, the ESTs that were differentially expressed between treatment and control plants of each accession were detected. Then the ESTs that were similarly expressed by tolerant and susceptible accessions were then eliminated by comparison. This included a two-way comparison, where tolerant and susceptible genotypes were compared within and between groups. Lastly, ESTs that were consensually differentially expressed between tolerant and susceptible accessions of the two batches were identified. The hypothesis was that if a putative gene was consistently expressed only in tolerant or susceptible genotype for a particular stress, it might be a candidate for tolerance/susceptibility for that stress. Globally, the level of 409 transcripts was affected in response to high-salinity stress in all the genotypes and tissue types studied. Of the transcripts consistently expressed in tolerant genotypes in response to high-salinity stress, the annotation of transcripts at 24 hpt suggest a reduction in energy production in shoots and roots by repression of putative genes including P700 chlorophyll a-apoprotein (DY475501) and NADH-plastoquinone oxidoreductase subunit I (DY475287), cytosolic fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase (DY475548) and splicing factor-like protein (DY396290). The ATHP3 (DY396300) and protein kinase (DY475077) that are potentially involved in signalling cascades responsible for sensing and relaying osmotic stress signals, were consistently repressed in tolerant genotypes in response to high-salinity. Additionally a glycine rich protein (DY396342) that is associated with lignification of cell walls in response to wounding and pathogen attack was repressed in tolerant genotypes. In tolerant genotypes at 48 hpt, two energy and metabolic-related transcripts were consistently repressed in roots, including a carbonic anhydrase (DY475403) and putative thiazole biosynthetic enzyme (DY475242). In shoots, only a pathogenesis-related protein (DY396301) was consistently repressed at 48 hpt, but a similar transcript (DY396281) was induced in roots of tolerant genotypes at the same time. Only four transcripts were DE in susceptible genotypes at 24 hpt, all occurring in root tissue.  Two of these were unknown/unclear, but the others included a proline oxidase transcript (DY475225) and a nuclear transport factor 2 (DY396436). At 48 hpi, a putative splicing factor-like protein (DY396290) and polyubiquitin (DY396328) were repressed in roots of susceptible genotypes. Interstingly, a putative xylosidase (DY475408) was induced in susceptible roots at 48 hpi. Finally, several unknown/unclear transcripts were DE in both tolerant and susceptible genotypes.  Of interest were two unknowns (DY475293 and DY475521) that were consistently expressed in tolerant genotypes and may be important for high-salinity tolerance. Keywords: Chickpea, High-salinity stress, tolerant, susceptible, cDNA microarray

DESIGN
Total RNA was extracted from separately pooled shoot and root tissues for each genotype {CPI 060546 (Tolerant1), CPI 60527 (Susceptible1), ICC 06474 (Tolerant2) and ICC 08161 (Susceptible2)} at each time-point (including control samples) using the RNeasy® Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). The quantity and quality of the total RNA samples were assessed by OD260/OD280 ratios and gel electrophoresis respectively. Fluorescent-labeled targets were prepared and hybridized to array slides as described [Coram, TE. and Pang, ECK. 2006. Expression profiling of Chickpea genes differentially regulated during a resistance response to Ascochyta rabiei. Plant Biotechnology Journal. 4(6), 647–666]. All hybridizations were performed with six technical replicates and three biological replicates, incorporating dye-swapping (i.e. reciprocal labelling of Cy3 and Cy5) to eliminate any dye bias. Overall, 576 images were analyzed from 96 genotype x tissue type x treatment/control x biological replication condition. Slides were scanned at 532 nm (Cy3 green laser) and 660 nm (Cy5 red laser) at 10 µm resolution using an Affymetrix® 428™ array scanner (Santa Clara, CA), and captured with the Affymetrix® Jaguar™ software (v. 2.0, Santa Clara, CA). Image analysis was performed using Imagene™ 5 (BioDiscovery, Marina Del Rey, CA) software. Quantified spot data was then compiled and transformed using GeneSight™ 3 (BioDiscovery, Marina Del Rey, CA). Data transformations consisted of a local background correction (mean intensity of background was subtracted from mean signal intensity for each spot), omitting flagged spots, LOWESS normalisation of the entire population, creating a Cy5/Cy3 mean signal ratio, taking a shifted log (base 2), and combination of duplicated spot data. To identify differentially expressed (DE) genes, expression ratio results were filtered to eliminate genes whose 95% confidence interval for mean fold change (FC) did not extend to 2-fold up or down, followed by Students t test with False Discovery Rate (FDR) multiple testing correction to retain only genes in which expression changes versus untreated control were significant at P < 0.05.

PLATFORM
GPL3649 PulseChip 1

CITATIONS
17764573

