TITLE
MiRNA Profiling of Whole Trabecular Bone: Identification of Osteoporosis-Related Changes in MiRNAs in Human Hip Bones

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are important regulators of gene expression, with documented roles in bone metabolism and osteoporosis, suggesting potential therapeutic targets. Our aim was to identify miRNAs differentially expressed in fractured vs nonfractured bones. Additionally, we performed a miRNA profiling of primary osteoblasts to assess the origin of these differentially expressed miRNAs. Total RNA was extracted from (a) fresh femoral neck trabecular bone from women undergoing hip replacement due to either osteoporotic fracture (OP group, n=6) or osteoarthritis in the absence of osteoporosis (Control group, n=6), matching the two groups by age and body mass index, and (b) primary osteoblasts obtained from knee replacement due to osteoarthritis (n=4). Samples were hybridized to a microRNA array containing more than 1900 miRNAs. Principal component analysis (PCA) plots and heat map hierarchical clustering were performed. For comparison of expression levels, the threshold was set at log fold change > 1.5 and a p-value < 0.05 (corrected for multiple testing). Both PCA and heat map analyses showed that the samples clustered according to the presence or absence of fracture. Overall, 790 and 315 different miRNAs were detected in fresh bone samples and in primary osteoblasts, respectively, 293 of which were common to both groups. A subset of 82 miRNAs was differentially expressed (p < 0.05) between osteoporotic and non-osteoporotic samples. The eight miRNAs with the lowest p-values (and for which a validated miRNA qPCR assay was available) were assayed, and two were confirmed: miR-320a and miR-483-5p. Both were over-expressed in the osteoporotic samples and expressed in primary osteoblasts. miR-320a is known to target CTNNB1 and predicted to regulate RUNX2, while miR-483-5p down-regulates IGF2. We observed a reduction trend for this target gene in the osteoporotic bone.In conclusion, we identified two osteoblast miRNAs over-expressed in osteoporotic fractures, which opens novel prospects for research and therapy.

DESIGN
12 samples were analyzed: Fresh femoral neck trabecular bone was obtained from 12 postmenopausal women undergoing hip replacement due to either osteoporotic fracture (n=6) or osteoarthritis in the absence of osteoporosis (n=6)

PLATFORM
GPL20999 miRCURY LNA microRNA Array, 7th generation (hsa, miRBase 20)

CITATIONS
26555194

