TITLE
Potential biomarker genes for crowding stress in rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss

ORGANISM
Oncorhynchus mykiss

SUMMARY
Stocking density is considered as a key factor determining the productivity of fish aquaculture systems. The transcriptomic response to crowding stress is, however, still poorly investigated. We aimed at the identification of potential biomarker genes via microarray analyses to get insight into molecular pathways modulated through density-induced stress in farmed rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss. Transcriptome profiling in liver, kidney, and gills was complemented with behaviarol observation and analysis of classical plasma parameters. Individuals of two trout strains were exposed for eight days to definite stocking densities, 1 kg/m³ (low density); 10 kg/m³ (moderate); 18 kg/m³ (elevated); and 35 kg/m³ (high). Whereas stocking density had no significant effect on cortisol levels, plasma glucose levels were elevated in trout kept at high density. Pathway enrichment analyses confirmed the upregulation of HIF1a signaling in liver contributing to glucose homeostasis during stress conditions, while mTOR and PI3K/AKT signaling pathways were downregulated. Further perturbed hepatic pathways were involved in protein ubiquitination and the biosynthesis of cholesterol, retinol and glutathione.

DESIGN
Three stocking density conditions were investigated: an uncrowded “moderate” density (MD: 10 kg trout/m³) , an elevated density (ED: 18 kg/m³ ), and high density (HD: 35 kg/m³). The experiment was performed twice with two strains of Steelhead rainbow trout (Troutlodge and Born trout), randomly assigned to identical glass tanks with MD (30 and 34 individuals), ED (60 and 64 individuals), and HD (120 and 140 individuals). Trout were sampled 8 d after experimental onset.

PLATFORM
GPL21057 Agilent-049158 Salmon Oligo Microarray 8x60K v1 020938

CITATIONS
Rebl A, Zebunke M, Borchel A, Bochert R, Verleih M, Goldammer T (2017) Microarray-predicted marker genes and molecular pathways indicating crowding stress in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). Aquaculture. 473: 355-365

