TITLE
Expression data from the process of chilling stress causing Alternaria alternata infection and leading to cotton leaf senescence

ORGANISM
Gossypium hirsutum

SUMMARY
Cotton premature leaf senescence often occurred with an increasing frequency in many cotton growing areas and caused serious reduction in yield and quality of cotton has been one of the impontant factors that restrict severely the production of cotton.Our laboratory studies showed chilling stress is the key factor that induced A. alternatia infection, caused Alternaria disease and then lead to cotton leaf senescence, but the molecular mechanism of cotton premature leaf senscence is still unclear. We used microarrays to study molecular mechanism of chilling stress causing Alternaria alternata infection and leading to cotton leaf senescence and find the key genes during this process.

DESIGN
Plants were grown in growth chamber with a 14/10 hours photoperiod, 28℃/22℃. Three-to-four leaves stage cotton plants were pre-treated by chilling stress with the low temperatures of 16/12℃ day/night for a fixed time length of 3 days. While, the normal growth plants were sustained growing at optimal temperature of 28/20℃ day/night. And then, both chilling stress pre-treated and normal growth cotton plants were inoculated with Alternaria. alternata isolate A1. The mock inoculations were performed with sterilized water. Cotton leaf Samples were respectively collected at 3, 6 days after inoculation (DAI) for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays. To that end, we collected 8 samples, i.e. chilling stress pre-treated cotton leaves: 3 DAI (C) and its mock control (D), 6 DAI (E) and its mock control (F); normal growth cotton leaves: 3 DAI (H) and its mock control (I), 6 DAI (J) and its mock control (K). All samples were arranged in completely randomized designed with three replications for each treatment.

PLATFORM
GPL8672 [Cotton] Affymetrix Cotton Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

