TITLE
Caco2 polarization time-course

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
CELL CULTURE: The human intestinal epithelial cell line Caco-2 (obtained from Dr. Stanley Falkow, Stanford University) was used to study the genome-wide expression program underlying the transition from cell proliferation to establishment of a polarized epithelial layer. Cells were first grown in sparse culture on plastic p15 dishes to generate a population of " contact naive " cells.  These cells were combined and plated at confluency on Costar filter inserts. The day cells were plated on filters is designated the zero time-point. Cells were cultured for 26 days, during which time they develop structural and functional polarity. Media was changed every other day. Triplicate samples were harvested at eleven time-points over the time course for microarray analysis. The entire time course was performed twice.  Three control arrays are included in this data set; (1) to determine how the gene-expression patterns in Caco-2 cells grown on a plastic dish compares to the expression profiles identified in Caco-2 cells grown on Costar filter inserts (microarray shcu182, data not shown), (2) to tested whether feeding the cells at different time-points had an effect on the Caco-2 gene-expression program.  All samples taken (except at the day zero time-point) were fed with fresh media one day prior to harvesting the sample. During TC3 and TC4, we performed two test arrays analyzing the transcriptional program in Caco-2 cells that were fed with fresh cell culture media 4h prior to taking the 7D time-point (microarrays shcu177 and shcu178, indicated with * in table S1). Groups of assays that are related as part of a time series. See additional information on overall design in Series supplementary file. ABSTRACT: Although there is considerable evidence implicating post-translational mechanisms in the development of epithelial cell polarity, little is known about the patterns of gene expression and transcriptional regulation during this process. We characterized the temporal program of gene expression during cell-cell adhesion-initiated polarization of human Caco-2 cells in tissue culture, which develop structural and functional polarity similar to that of enterocytes in vivo. A distinctive switch in gene expression patterns occurred upon formation of cell-cell contacts between neighboring cells. Expression of a cluster of genes involved in cell proliferation switched off and concomitantly the expression of genes related to functional specializations of polarized epithelial cells was induced. Induction of these latter genes correlated with formation of important structural and functional features related to enterocyte differentiation and establishment of structural and functional cell polarity. Coordinated expression of genes encoding components of functional cell structures were often observed, indicating temporal control of expression and assembly of multiprotein complexes. Changes in gene expression patterns during Caco-2 cell differentiation in vitro paralleled those in terminally differentiating enterocytes migrating up the intestinal crypt-villus axis in vivo, despite the lack of stromal cells and gradients of morphogens in this tissue culture model. Keywords: time_series_design

DESIGN
Computed

PLATFORM
GPL5058 SHCU

CITATIONS
17699589 , 17699590

