TITLE
Trans-effects of sub-chromosomal duplications on DNA methylation patterns in mouse models of Down syndrome: whole genome bisulfite sequencing of cerebral samples from Dp(10)1Yey  and Dp(16)1Yey mouse models.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background: Trisomy 21 causes Down syndrome (DS), but the mechanisms by which the extra chromosome leads to deficient intellectual and immune function are not well understood.  Results: Here, we profile CpG methylation in DS and control cerebral and cerebellar cortex of adults and cerebrum of fetuses. We purify neuronal and non-neuronal nuclei and T-lymphocytes and find biologically relevant genes with DS-specific methylation (DS-DM) in brain cells. Some genes show brain-specific DS-DM, while others show stronger DS-DM in T cells. Both 5-methyl-cytosine and 5-hydroxy-methyl-cytosine contribute to the DS-DM. Thirty percent of genes with DS-DM in adult brain cells also show DS-DM in fetal brains, indicating early onset of these epigenetic changes, and we find early maturation of methylation patterns in DS brain and lymphocytes. Some, but not all, of the DS-DM genes show differential expression. DS-DM preferentially affected CpGs in or near specific transcription factor binding sites, implicating a mechanism involving altered transcription factor binding. Methyl-seq of brain DNA from mouse models with sub-chromosomal duplications mimicking DS reveals partial but significant overlaps with human DS-DM and shows that multiple chromosome 21 genes contribute to the downstream epigenetic effects.  Conclusions: These data point to novel biological mechanisms in DS and have general implications for trans effects of chromosomal duplications and aneuploidies on epigenetic patterning.

DESIGN
Examination of methylation changes in two mouse models of Down syndrome with sub-chromosomal duplications, Dp(10)1Yey  and Dp(16)1Yey, compared to one littermate wild type mouse using whole genome bisulfite sequencing.

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
26607552

