TITLE
The Immunobiology of Aging [II]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The overriding objective of this application is to seek funding for the development of a crossectional profile of immune phenotype of over 600 normal subjects between the ages of 50 and 90. As a consequence, we will infer changes in immune phenotype of normal subjects as they age. These immune phenotypic data, as well as standard laboratory tests and evaluations of questionnaires, will be used to generate a large and comprehensive database of demographic and biological information. The proposal utilizes the strengths of the Stanford Human Immune Monitoring Core (HIMC) and the unique expertise in basic immunology, immune monitoring, the development of patient registries, biostatistics and bioinformatics at Stanford.

DESIGN
The dataset will comprise a crossectional analysis of the local San Francisco Peninsula general population between the ages of 50 and 90 (representing equal gender and representative ethnic population, and equal distribution by decade of life). The registry will contain demographic data, race/ethnicity, prescribed medications, over the counter medications, vitamins, alternative therapies, physical function questionnaire, alternative contact person, and HIPPA release. Fasting blood will be obtained for immune phenotyping. The immune profile will contain the results of both conventional and novel immune profiling assays to develop the normative immune profile of aging (using PBMC subset analysis, cytokines, and activation induced signaling of PBMCs for phosphoepitope and gene expression analyses). Data from these analyses will be useful in identifying biomarkers of the normal immune profile associated with aging as well as correlation with phenotypic aspects of aging such as sarcopenia and disability The immune profile (as well as normal blood chemistries and demographic data) of these subjects will be made available to serve as the basis for future longitudinal study of change in the immune profile over time in association with the development of co-morbidities associated with aging. in the PBMC gene expression, 120 samples were analyzed (no replicates), containing patients and controls.

