TITLE
In vivo polarization of Ovalbumin (OVA)-specific CD4 (OTII) T cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
There remains a need for analysis of CD4 helper T cells differentiation in vivo. To this end ovalbumin (OVA)-specific CD4 (OTII) T cells transferred into congenic mice were studied. Live attenuated OVA-expressing Salmonella (SalOVA) induce T-bet and IFN-g in OTII cells, while alum-precipitated OVA (alumOVA) induces GATA-3 and IL-4. Although 70% of alumOVA-responding OTII cells express GATA-3, only 7% produce IL-4. Thus Th2-polarization defined solely by IL-4 production does not recognize the diversity of GATA-3-expressing effectors. Low-density arrays were designed to assess the expression of 384 genes by real-time RT-PCR. Extensive early diversification occurred in both responses. SalOVA selectively induced many chemokines and pro-inflammatory cytokines, while alumOVA induced few Th2-associated cytokines. Several cytokines and molecules associated with Th17 cells and follicular helper cells were also induced by both antigens. The transcription factor Helios was exclusively induced in alumOVA-responding OTII cells, and critically not in standard in vitro Th2-polarization systems. Early synchronous up-regulation of Helios and GATA-3 mRNA is paralleled at protein level with largely coincident localization in specific nuclear foci of OTII cells responding to alumOVA. This appears to be consistent with a key role for both transcription regulators in the direction of Th2 responses in vivo. Keywords: In vivo T cell polarization

DESIGN
Ovalbumin (OVA)-specific CD4 (OTII) T cells were transferred into C57BL/6 mice that were immunized either with live attenuated OVA-expressing Salmonella (Sal) or with alum-precipitated OVA (alum), or not (Naïve). Gene expression assay was performed on FACS sorted OTII cells (Naïve, Sal, Alum). OTII cells were purified from three independent groups of ten naïve, or SalOVA-immunized or alumOVA-immunized mice.

PLATFORM
GPL5073 Applied Biosystems Customized TaqMan Low Density Array (Mouse) _ In vivo T cell gene expression

CITATIONS
18582945

