TITLE
Gene expression analysis in absence epilepsy using a monozygotic twin design

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Objective: To identify genes involved in idiopathic absence epilepsies by analysing gene expression using a monozygotic (MZ) twin design. Methods: Genome-wide gene expression in lymphoblastoid cell lines was determined using microarrays derived from five discordant and four concordant MZ twin pairs with idiopathic absence epilepsies and five unaffected MZ twin pairs.  Gene expression was analysed using three strategies: discordant MZ twins were compared as matched pairs, MZ twins concordant for epilepsy were compared to control MZ twins, and a singleton design of affected versus unaffected MZ twin individuals was used irrespective of twin pairing.  An overlapping gene list was generated from these analyses.  Dysregulation of genes recognised from the microarray experiment were validated using quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR) in the twin sample and in an independent sample of 18 sporadic absence cases and 24 healthy controls. Results: Sixty-five probe sets were identified from the microarray analysis strategies.  Sixteen genes were chosen for validation and nine of these genes confirmed by qRT-PCR in the twin sample.  Differential expression of the immediate early gene EGR1 and RCN2, coding for the calcium-binding protein Reticulocalbin 2, was re-confirmed by qRT-PCR in the independent sample. Interpretation: Using a unique sample of discordant MZ twins, our study identified genes with altered expression, which suggest novel mechanisms in idiopathic absence epilepsy.  Dysregulation of EGR1 and RCN2 might represent common transcriptional alterations in idiopathic absence epilepsy. Keywords: Childhood Absence Epilepsy, Juvenile Absence Epilepsy, Idiopathic Generalised Epilepsy, gene expression, twin study, monozygotic twins

DESIGN
Genome-wide gene expression in lymphoblastoid cell lines was determined using microarrays derived from five discordant and four concordant MZ twin pairs with idiopathic absence epilepsies and five unaffected MZ twin pairs.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
18435749

