TITLE
Long-term exposure to cold plasma-generated ROS –an in vitro model for redox-related diseases of the  skin

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Oxidative stress illustrates an imbalance between radical formation and removal. Frequent redox stress is critically involved in a variety of human pathologies including cancer, psoriasis, and chronic wounds. However, reactive species pursue a dual role being involved in signaling on the one hand and oxidative damage on the other. Using a HaCaT keratinocyte cell culture model, we here aimed at investigating the cellular and transcriptional response to periodic, low dose oxidative challenge over three months. Chronic redox stress was generated by frequent incubation with cold physical plasma treated cell culture medium. Using mRNA microarray technology, we found both acute ROS stress responses as well as numerous adaptions on the transcriptional level and over several weeks of redox challenge. This included an altered expression of 260 genes that function in inflammation and redox homeostasis, such as, signaling molecules, cytokines, and anti-oxidant enzymes. Apoptotic signaling was affected to a minor extend, especially in p53 down-stream targets. Strikingly, the anti-apoptotic heat shock protein HSP27 was strongly upregulated. These results suggest a variety of adaptive responses relating involved a number of cellular processes elicited by frequent redox stress over several months. They may help to better understand inflammatory responses in redox related diseases and possibly allow uncovering new biomarkers of ROS-stress. Microarrays were used to analyze and investigate the biological effects of repeated exposure of cold physical plasma on human HaCaT keratinocytes. Using an argon plasma jet kinpen, regulated transcripts were analyzed and further described in Schmidt et al. (submittes): “Long-term exposure to cold plasma-generated ROS –an in vitro model for redox-related diseases of the  skin”.

DESIGN
HaCaT keratinocytes exposed to plasma treated medium - time course

