TITLE
Ethanol stress response in Desulfovibrio vulgaris

ORGANISM
Desulfovibrio vulgaris str. Hildenborough

SUMMARY
Desulfovibrio vulgaris has been studied extensively for its potential in the bioremediation of heavy metals and radionuclides. Hydrocarbons and solvents, as frequent environmental co-contaminants, have been reported to inhibit microbial activities and thereby pose a limitation on bioremediation efficiency. As a part of the Genomes: GTL project to deduce the stress response pathways in metal/radionuclide reducing bacteria, we studied the responses of D. vulgaris to ethanol, which is a solvent and co-contaminant frequently encountered at contaminated DOE sites. Growth experiments in closed vessels at 37 °C indicated that D. vulgaris could maintain normal growth with 1%(v/v) ethanol. The growth rates were reduced with increasing ethanol concentrations at 2% and 5%. Growth ceased when ethanol concentration was raised to 5%(v/v). Cell lysis was apparent with decreasing optical density following 10% ethanol addition. To assess the mechanism of ethanol inhibition, genome-wide transcriptional profiles were analyzed from D. vulgaris cultures following ethanol (5% v/v) treatment using whole-genome microarrays. The ethanol treatment altered the expression of a large number of genes in the D. vulgaris genome, of which 354 were up-regulated greater than 2 fold and 217 were down-regulated by over 2 fold. As expected, changes in the transcriptional profile were similar to those of the stress response to acetone, which is also a solvent. Transcripts highly up-regulated included genes encoding the flagella structural subunits, suggesting motility as a mechanism of solvent stress response. Another group of genes highly induced were chaperones, such as dnaJ, groES, and hsp20, indicating the importance of maintaining proper protein folding under ethanol stress. Down-regulated genes included two groups of genes, ribosomal proteins and amino acid transporters, consistent with the growth inhibition by ethanol observed in growth studies. These results were interpreted that D. vulgaris responds to elevated solvent levels by increased motility and maintenance of proper protein functions. Current work is focused on the analysis of regulatory pathways based on temporal transcriptional dynamics. Keywords: Stress response

DESIGN
Desulfovibrio vulgaris from our laboratory culture collection was cultured at 37°C in Lactate-Sulfate medium to mid-log phase. Subsequently, ethanol (5% v/v) was added into triplicate cultures. Gene expression profiles 30 and 100 minutes following ethanol exposure were compared with those of the control cultures without ethanol treatment. Total RNA was harvested from three replicate control and treated cultures at two time points following ethanol addition. RNA extraction, purification, and labeling were performed independently on each cell sample.Two samples of each total RNA preparation were labeled, one with Cy3-dUTP and another with Cy5-dUTP for microarray hybridization (Dye swap).

PLATFORM
GPL4071 ORNL-ESD Desulfovibrio vulgaris 70mer oligo-array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

