TITLE
Transcriptional profle of bronchoalveolar cells in sarcoidosis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Introduction: Sarcoidosis is a multisystem immuno-inflammatory disorder of unknown etiology that most commonly involves the lungs. We hypothesized that an unbiased approach to identify pathways activated in alveolar macrophages—a key immuno-inflammatory cell in the lung—can shed light on the pathogenesis of this complex disease. Methods: We recruited 15 patients with various stages of sarcoidosis and 12 healthy controls. All subjects underwent bronchoscopy with lavage. For each subject, total RNA was extracted from bronchoalveolar (BAL) cells  and hybridized to an Affymetrix GeneChip Human Genome U133A 2.0 microarray. Rigorous statistical methods were applied to identify differential gene expression between subjects with sarcoidosis vs. controls. To better elucidate pathways differentially activated between these groups, we applied gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) to the transcriptional profiles of BAL cells. We used false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01 to designate significant enrichment. Results: Sarcoid patients were either non-smokers or ex-smokers, all had lung involvement and only 2 were on systemic prednisone.  Healthy controls were all non-smokers. Comparison of BAL cell gene expression between sarcoidosis and healthy subjects revealed over 1200 differentially expressed genes at an FDR cutoff < 0.01. Several previously described immune mediators, such as interferon gamma, were up-regulated in the sarcoidosis subjects. Since genes often exert their influence through functionally coherent modules, we performed GSEA based on global expression profiles of alveolar macrophages between the subject groups.  We identified more than 200 gene sets enriched in patients with sarcoidosis whereas very few pathways were over-represented in the healthy controls. Many of the sarcoidosis-associated pathways mapped to inflammatory and immune-related processes including T-cell signaling, graft vs. host disease, IL-12, IL-23, and IL-17 pathways, and oxidative phosphorylation. However, we also found and confirmed significant alteration in Proteasome-related pathways. Conclusions: BAL cells in sarcoidosis are characterized by enrichment of distinct transcriptional networks involved in immuno-inflammatory and proteasomal processes. Our findings add to the growing evidence implicating airspace resident cells in the pathogenesis of sarcoidoisis and identify specific pathways whose activation may modulate disease progression.

DESIGN
Total RNA from BAL cells of 15 subjects with sarcoidosis and 12 healthy controls was hybridized to 27 Affymetrix Genechip Human U133A 2.0 microarrays

PLATFORM
GPL571 [HG-U133A_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
27460362

