TITLE
Comprehensive analysis of ABA effects on ethylene synthesis and signaling during tomato fruit ripening

ORGANISM
Solanum lycopersicum var. cerasiforme

SUMMARY
Purpose: The goals of this study was to provide genome-wide data to investigate the molecular mechanism of the interaction between ABA and ethylene during tomato fruit ripening Methods: Regarding the fruits sampled at the 9th day as a well-characterized stage, we used RNA-seq to conducted a comparative analysis of exogenous ABA and NDGA effects on all components involved in biosynthesis and signaling of ethylene and ABA.The identified crucial genes in response to ABA were further performed a ripening time-course analysis by RT-PCR. In addition, we also detected how ethylene affected ABA action at the onset of ripening by treating the fruits with 1-MCP immediately after ABA application. Results: Our study not only illustrated how ABA regulated itself at the transcription level, but also elucidated that ABA can facilitate ethylene production and response by regulating some crucial genes such as LeACS4, LeACO1 and LeETR6 etc. In addition, investigation on the fruits treated with 1-MCP immediately after ABA exposure revealed that ethylene might be essential for the induction of ABA biosynthesis and signaling at the onset of fruit ripening. Furthermore, some specific transcription factors (TFs) known as regulators of ethylene synthesis and sensibility (e.g. MADS-RIN, TAGL1, CNR and NOR etc.) were also observed to be ABA responsive, which implied that ABA influenced ethylene action possibly through the regulation of these TFs expression. Conclusions: Our data suggested that ABA may act as an upstream regulator to modulate ethylene synthesis and signal transduction, which consequently influenced the ripening process. This comprehensive survey not only demonstrated how ABA regulated itself at the molecular level, but also indicated that ABA had a positive impact on ethylene production and action by regulating key genes such as LeACS2, LeACS4, LeACO1 and LeETR6. Besides, our results also revealed that ethylene might be of great importance to induce ABA accumulation and response at the onset of ripening. Moreover, many ripening related TFs, such as MADS-RIN, TAGL1, CNR and NOR, were observed to be affected by ABA, implying that a TF-mediated manner may be involved in the interaction between ABA and ethylene. This study extends our understanding of the mechanism that how ABA-triggered tomato fruit ripening, and illustrates the complex mechanism of reciprocity between ABA and ethylene at the transcription level.

DESIGN
Examination of genome-wide gene expression changes of the 9th day tomato fruits treated with ABA, NDGA and CK, stored at  20 oC,90% RH in the dark.

