TITLE
Expression data transgenic mouse mammary tumors

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Immunosurveillance constitutes the first step of cancer immunoediting in which developing malignant lesions are eliminated by anti-tumorigenic immune cells. However, the mechanisms by which neoplastic cells induce an immunosuppressive state to evade the immune response are still unclear. The transcription factor Stat3 has been implicated in breast carcinogenesis and tumor immunosuppression in advanced disease, but its involvement in early disease development has not been established. Here, we genetically ablated Stat3 in the tumor epithelia of the inducible PyVmT mammary tumor model and found that Stat3-deficient mice recapitulated the three phases of immunoediting: elimination, equilibrium, and escape. Pathological analyses revealed that Stat3-deficient mice initially formed hyperplastic and early adenoma-like lesions that later completely regressed, thereby preventing the emergence of mammary tumors in the majority of animals. Furthermore, tumor regression was correlated with massive immune infiltration into the Stat3-deficient lesions, leading to their elimination. In a minority of animals, focal, non-metastatic Stat3-deficient mammary tumors escaped immunosurveillance after a long latency or equilibrium period. Taken together, our findings suggest that tumor epithelial expression of Stat3 plays a critical role in promoting an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment during breast tumor initiation and progression, and prompt further investigation of Stat3 inhibitory strategies that may reactivate the immunosurveillance program. We used microarrays to detail determine the transcriptional difference between PyVmT-driven mouse mammary tumors that progressed in the presence or absense of epithelial Stat3.

DESIGN
Mammary tumors from transgenic mice were excise and flash frozen. Tumors were analyzed from 8 Stat3-proficient tumors and 6 Stat3-deficient tumors. RNA was extracted and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays.

