TITLE
The tissue-engineered human cornea as a model to study expression of matrix metalloproteinases during corneal wound healing

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Corneal injuries remain a major cause of consultation in the ophthalmology clinics worldwide. Repair of corneal wounds is a complex mechanism that involves cell death, migration, proliferation, differentiation, and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. In the present study, we used a tissue-engineered, two-layers (epithelium and stroma) human cornea as a biomaterial to study both the cellular and molecular mechanisms of wound healing. Gene profiling on microarrays revealed important alterations in the pattern of genes expressed by tissue-engineered corneas in response to wound healing. Expression of many MMPs-encoding genes was shown by microarray and qPCR analyses to increase in the migrating epithelium of wounded corneas. Many of these enzymes were converted into their enzymatically active form as wound closure proceeded. In addition, expression of MMPs by human corneal epithelial cells (HCECs) was affected both by the stromal fibroblasts and the collagen-enriched ECM they produce. Most of all, results from mass spectrometry analyses provided evidence that a fully stratified epithelium is required for proper synthesis and organization of the ECM on which the epithelial cells adhere. In conclusion, and because of the many characteristics it shares with the native cornea, this human two layers corneal substitute may prove particularly useful to decipher the mechanistic details of corneal wound healing.

DESIGN
Primary cultures of human corneal epithelial cells cultivated on BSA (number of replicates: 7), Collagen type I (number of replicates: 2), Collagen type IV (number of replicates: 2), Fibronectin (number of replicates: 2), Tenascin C (number of replicates: 2) and Laminin (number of replicates: 2) matrix. Central, internal and external ring of wounded Tissue-engineered human cornea.

PLATFORM
GPL13607 Agilent-028004 SurePrint G3 Human GE 8x60K Microarray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
26686051

