TITLE
Molecular and cellular profilling of scalp psoriasis reveals differences and similarities compared to skin psoriasis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Scalp psoriasis shows a variable clinical spectrum and in many cases poses a great therapeutic challenge. However, it remains unknown whether the immune response of scalp psoriasis differs from understood pathomechanisms of psoriasis on other skin areas. We sought to determine the cellular and mollecular phenotype of scalp psoriasis by performing a comparative analysis of scalp vs skin using lesional and nonlesional samples from 20 Caucasian subjects with untreated moderate to severe psoriasis and significant scalp involvement, and 10 control subjects without psoriasis. Our results suggest that even in the scalp psoriasis is a disease of the inter-follicular skin. The immune mechanisms that mediate scalp psoriasis were found to be similar to those involved in skin psoriasis. However, the magnitude of dysregulation, number of differentially expressed genes, and enrichment of the psoriatic genomic fingerprinting were more prominent in skin lesions. Furthermore, the scalp transcriptome showed increased modulation of several gene-sets, particularly those induced by interferon-gamma, compared with skin psoriasis which was mainly associated with activation of TNF↵/L-17/IL-22-induced keratinocyte response genes. We also detected differences in expression of gene-sets involving negative regulation, epigenetic regulation, epidermal differentiation, and dendritic cell or Th1/Th17/Th22-related T-cell processes.

DESIGN
To define the transcriptomic profile of scalp skin, punch biopsies (6 mm diameter) were obtained from 20 Caucasian patients with untreated moderate to severe psoriasis with significative scalp involvement and 10  control subjects without psoriasis (N). Lesional (LS) samples were isolated from the infiltrated border of a plaque of psoriasis. Non lesional (NL) samples were taken from  scalp areas with no visible psoriasis between the infiltrated plaques.

PLATFORM
GPL571 [HG-U133A_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
26849645

