TITLE
Physiological characterization and comparative transcriptome analysis of a developmentally retarded Chinese cabbage (Brassica campestris ssp. pekinensis) mutant

ORGANISM
Brassica rapa subsp. oleifera

SUMMARY
The leaf of Chinese cabbage is the major place of photosynthesis, the mutation of leaf may directly affect the rate of plant growth and development and the formation of leafy head, and ultimately influence the yield and quality of Chinese cabbage. We identified a developmentally retarded mutant (drm) exhibiting stable inheritance, which was derived from Chinese cabbage DH line ‘FT’ using a combination of isolated microspore culture and radiation treatment (60Co γ-rays). The drm exhibited slow growth and development at the seedling and heading stages, leading to the production of a tiny, leafy head, as well as chlorophyll-deficient leaves, especially in seedlings. Genetic analysis indicated that the phenotype of drm was controlled by a single recessive nuclear gene. Compared with wild-type line ‘FT’, the drm’s chlorophyll content was significantly reduced and its chloroplast structure was abnormal. Moreover, the photosynthetic efficiency and chlorophyll fluorescence parameters were significantly decreased. The changes in leaf color, combined with these altered physiological characters may influence the growth and development of plant, ultimately resulting in the developmentally retarded phenotype of drm. To further understand the molecular regulatory mechanisms of phenotypic differences between ‘FT’ and drm, comparative transcriptome analysis were performed using RNA-Seq, a total of 338 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were detected between ‘FT’ and drm. According to GO and KEGG pathway analysis, a number of DEGs which involved in the chlorophyll degradation and photosynthesis were identified, such as chlorophyllase and ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase. In addition, the expression patterns of 12 DEGs, including three chlorophyll degradation- and photosynthesis-related genes and nine randomly selected genes, were confirmed by qRT-PCR. Numerous single nucleotide polymorphisms were also identified, providing a valuable resource for research and molecular marker-assistant breeding in Chinese cabbage. These results contribute to our understanding of the molecular regulatory mechanisms underlying growth and development and lay the foundation for future genetic and functional genomics studies in Chinese cabbage.

DESIGN
The RNA from  the third true leaves (day 15 to day 24 after the appearance of the third true leaves) of a developmentally retarded mutant (drm) and its wild type ‘FT’ in Chinese cabbage were sequenced by RNA-Seq, in triplicate.

