TITLE
Circulating Cells in Coronary Collateral Artery Growth

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Collateral artery growth, also termed arteriogenesis, occurs upon narrowing or occlusion of a major artery. To date, attempts to stimulate arteriogenesis in patients for therapeutic purposes have not been successful. Experimental models showed that circulating cells orchestrate arteriogenesis. In humans, a large heterogeneity exists in the arteriogenic response. We hypothesized that good arteriogenic responders (GARs) and bad arteriogenic responders (BARs) differ in gene expression profiles of circulating cells, thereby disclosing potential new therapeutic strategies for the stimulation of arteriogenesis.  Methods: A total of 45 patients scheduled for percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) for single-vessel coronary artery disease underwent intracoronary measurements of collateral flow index (CFI) to distinguish between GARs (CFI > 0.21) and BARs (CFI≤0.21). Monocytes and CD34+ stem cells were collected from peripheral blood. A fraction of monocytes was further processed to obtain stimulated monocytes and macrophages. Whole genome transcriptome analysis was performed on all four cell types. Results: LPS-stimulated monocytes showed 244 genes differentially expressed (false discovery rate < 0.05) between GARs and BARs. Macrophage gene expression correlated with stimulated monocytes, while resting monocytes and stem cells revealed no differential gene expression. Stimulated monocytes from GARs showed a strongly attenuated response in several interferon- and apoptosis-related genes, which was corroborated at the protein level.  Conclusions Circulating cells from GARs and BARs distinctively differ in their gene expression profiles upon stimulation. The reduced expression of interferon and apoptosis genes in GARs may lead to novel therapeutic approaches for the stimulation of collateral artery growth. Keywords: disease state analysis, stress response analysis, natural defense mechanism analysis

