TITLE
Core pathway mutations induce de-differentiation of murine astrocytes into glioblastoma stem cells that are sensitive to radiation, but resistant to temozolomide (RNA-seq)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Introduction:  Glioma stem cells isolated from human glioblastomas are resistant to radiation and cytotoxic chemotherapy and may drive tumor recurrence. Treatment efficacy may depend on the presence of glioma stem cells, expression of DNA repair enzymes such as methylguanine methyltransferase (MGMT), or transcriptome subtype. Methods:  To model genetic alterations in the core signaling pathways of human glioblastoma, we induced conditional Rb knockout, Kras activation, and Pten deletion mutations in cortical murine astrocytes.  Serial neurosphere culture, multi-lineage differentiation, and orthotopic transplantation were used to assess whether these mutations induced de-differentiation of cortical astrocytes into glioma stem cells.  Efficacy of radiation and temozolomide was examined in vitro and in an allograft model in vivo.  The effects of radiation on transcriptome subtype was examined by expression profiling. Results:  G1/S-defective, Rb knockout astrocytes gained unlimited self-renewal and multi-lineage differentiation capacity, in both the presence and absence of Kras and Pten mutations.  Only triple mutant astrocytes formed serially-transplantable glioblastoma allografts.  Triple mutant astrocytes and allografts were sensitive to radiation, but expressed Mgmt and were resistant to temozolomide.  Radiation induced a shift in transcriptome subtype of glioblastoma allografts from proneural to mesenchymal. Conclusion:  A defined set of core signaling pathway mutations induces de-differentiation of cortical murine astrocytes into glioma stem cells.  This non-germline genetically engineered mouse model mimics human proneural glioblastoma on histopathological, molecular, and treatment response levels.  It may be useful in dissecting the genetic and cellular mechanisms of treatment resistance and developing more effective therapies.

DESIGN
Investigation of chromatin accessibility in astrocytes and glioblastoma cell lines

PLATFORM
GPL19057 Illumina NextSeq 500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
26826202

