TITLE
ofr1 regulates white-to-opaque switching and mating of Candida albicans (MTLa/α)

ORGANISM
Candida albicans

SUMMARY
It has been proposed that the ancestral fungus was mating competent and homothallic. However, many mating competent fungi were initially classified as asexual because their mating capacity was hidden behind layers of regulation. For efficient in vitro mating, the essentially obligate diploid ascomycete pathogen C. albicans has to homozygose its mating type locus from MTLa/α to MTLa/a or MTLα/α, and then undergo an environmentally controlled epigenetic switch to the mating competent opaque form. These requirements greatly reduce the potential for C. albicans mating. Deletion of the YciI domain gene OFR1 bypasses the need for C. albicans cells to homozygose the mating type locus prior to switching to the opaque form and mating, and allows homothallic mating of MTL heterozygous strains. This bypass is carbon source dependent and does not occur when cells are grown on glucose. Transcriptional profiling of ofr1 mutant cells shows that in addition to regulating cell type and mating circuitry, Ofr1 is needed for proper regulation of histone and chitin biosynthesis gene expression. It appears that OFR1 is a key regulator in C. albicans, and functions in part to maintain the cryptic mating phenotype of the pathogen. Distruption of OFR1 gene which encodes a Yci1 related domain in Candida ablicans (MTLa/α) is shown to have white-opaque switching related and mating related gene expression. The expression of histone genes are also positively regulated in some conditions.

DESIGN
Four-condition experiment, ofr1 null mutant (MTLa/α) vs. wild type (MTLa/α) on glucose medium; ofr1 null mutant (MTLa/α) vs. wild type (MTLa/α) on GlcNAc medium; ofr1 null mutant (MTLa/α) opaque cells vs. ofr1 null mutant (MTLa/α) white cells on glucose medium; ofr1 null mutant (MTLa/α) opaque cells vs. ofr1 null mutant (MTLa/α) white cells on GlcNAc medium. One replica per array.

PLATFORM
GPL19196 NRC-BRI C. albicans expression microarray V2.0

CITATIONS
27118591

