TITLE
Aluminum-inducible genes

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Aluminum (Al) toxicity, which is caused by the solubilization of Al3  in acid soils resulting in inhibition of root growth and nutrient/water acquisition, is a serious limitation to crop production, because up to one-half of the world?s potentially arable land is acidic. To date, however, no Al tolerance genes have yet been cloned. The physiological mechanisms of tolerance are somewhat better understood; the major documented mechanism involves the Al-activated release of Al-binding organic acids from the root tip, preventing uptake into the primary site of toxicity. In this study, a quantitative trait loci analysis of Al tolerance in Arabidopsis was conducted, which also correlated Al tolerance quantitative trait locus (QTL) with physiological mechanisms of tolerance. The analysis identified two major loci, which explain approximately 40% of the variance in Al tolerance observed among recombinant inbred lines derived from Landsberg erecta (sensitive) and Columbia (tolerant). We characterized the mechanism by which tolerance is achieved, and we found that the two QTL cosegregate with an Al-activated release of malate from Arabidopsis roots. Although only two of the QTL have been identified, malate release explains nearly all (95%) of the variation in Al tolerance in this population. Al tolerance in Landsberg erecta   Columbia is more complex genetically than physiologically, in that a number of genes underlie a single physiological mechanism involving root malate release. These findings have set the stage for the subsequent cloning of the genes responsible for the Al tolerance QTL, and a genomics-based cloning strategy and initial progress on this are also discussed. A replicate experimental design type is where a series of replicates are performed to evaluate reproducibility or as a pilot study to determine the appropriate number of replicates for a subsequent experiments. Keywords: replicate_design

DESIGN
Computed

PLATFORM
GPL3226 MSU2_06-00

CITATIONS
12805622

