TITLE
Distinct ErbB-2-coupled signalling pathways promote mammary tumors with unique pathological and transcriptional profiles

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
ErbB-2 overexpression and amplification occurs in 15 - 30% of human invasive breast  carcinomas associated with poor clinical prognosis. Previously, we have demonstrated that four  ErbB-2/Neu tyrosine-autophosphorylation sites within the cytoplasmic tail of the receptor recruit  distinct adaptor proteins and are sufficient to mediate transforming signals in vitro. Two of these  sites representing the Grb2 (Neu-YB) and Shc (Neu-YD) binding sites can induce mammary  tumourigenesis and metastasis. Here we show that Neu-YC and Neu-YE transgenic mice develop  metastatic mammary tumours. A detailed comparison of pathological and transcriptional profiles  among all Neu mutant mouse models revealed that Neu-YC, -YD and -YE mammary tumours  shared similar pathological and transcriptional features correlating with their capacity to signal  through a common adaptor like Shc. In contrast, the Neu-YB mouse model displayed a unique  pathology with a high metastatic potential that correlates with a distinct transcriptional profile.  We identified genes specifically expressed in YB-induced mammary tumours, including  CXCL12/SDF-1α that promotes malignant tumour progression. Furthermore, Neu-YB tumour  epithelial cells showed abundant intracellular CXCL12/SDF-1α protein, which may reflect the  more aggressive phenotype among all Neu mutant mouse models. These findings indicate that  activation of distinct Neu-coupled signalling pathways has a deep impact on the biological  behaviour of Neu-induced tumours. Keywords: genetic modification, Neu mutant mouse models, mammary tumor

DESIGN
Total RNA was isolated from 10 individual flash frozen mammary tumour samples  derived from our MMTV/neundl-NYPD, -YB, -YC, -YD, -YE and the parental MMTV/neu  NDL2-5 strains. Two RNA pools, containing equal  amount of total RNA from five individual tumours, were generated from each strain and  functioned as a biological repeat. Five hundred nanograms of total RNA from each pool was  subjected to one round of T7 linear amplification using the Amino Allyl MessageAmpTM aRNA  Kit (Ambion, Austin, Texas). Ten micrograms of the resulting aRNA was labelled with Cy3 and  Cy5 dyes.  Each of the 12 Samples represents a dyeswap pair.

PLATFORM
GPL2872 Agilent-012694 Whole Mouse Genome G4122A (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
17699761

