TITLE
Effects of Freeze-Thawing and Intravenous Infusion on Mesenchymal Stromal Cell Gene Expression

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens ; Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) are increasingly used as an investigative therapeutic product for immune disorders and degenerative disease. Typically, MSC are isolated from human tissue, expanded in culture and cryopreserved until usage. The safety and efficacy of MSC therapy will depend on the phenotypical and functional characteristics of MSC. The freeze-thawing procedure may change these characteristics. Furthermore, the microenvironment that the cells encounter after administration may impact the properties of MSC. It has been demonstrated that the large majority of MSC localize to the lungs after intravenous infusion, making this the site to study the effects of the in vivo milieu on administered MSC. In the present study we investigated the effect of freeze-thawing and of the mouse lung microenvironment on human adipose tissue-derived MSC. The effect of freeze-thawing on the whole genome expression profile of MSC was small and did not exceed inter-donor differences. There were no major changes in the expression of hemostatic regulators on transcriptional level, but significantly increased expression of procoagulant tissue factor on the surface of thawed adipose MSC, correlating with increased procoagulant activity of thawed cells after blood exposure in vitro and after infusion to mice. Exposure for 2h to the lung microenvironment had a major effect on MSC gene expression and affected several immunological and metabolic pathways. This indicates that MSC undergo functional changes shortly after infusion and this may influence the efficacy of MSC to modulate inflammatory responses. The results of this study demonstrate that MSC rapidly alter in response to the local milieu and that disease specific conditions may shape MSC after administration.

DESIGN
3 groups, n=3 per group + 1 negative control

PLATFORM
GPL16791 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Homo sapiens) GPL17021 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
26914168

