TITLE
Gene expression profiling in human precision-cut liver slices upon treatment with the FXR agonist obeticholic acid [human]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: The bile acid-activated farnesoid X receptor (FXR) is a nuclear receptor regulating bile acid, glucose and cholesterol homeostasis. Obeticholic acid (OCA; also known as INT-747 or 6α-ethyl-chenodeoxycholic acid), a promising drug for the treatment of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and type 2 diabetes, activates FXR. Mouse studies demonstrated that FXR activation by OCA (INT-747) alters hepatic expression of many genes. However, no data are available on the effects of OCA in human liver. Here, we generated gene expression profiles in human precision-cut liver slices (hPCLS) after treatment with OCA. Methods: hPCLS were incubated with OCA for 24 h. WT or FXR -/- mice received OCA or vehicle by oral gavage for 7 days. Results: Transcriptomic analysis showed that well-known FXR target genes, including NR0B2 (SHP), ABCB11 (BSEP), SLC51A (OSTα) and SLC51B (OSTβ) and ABCB4 (MDR3), are regulated by OCA in hPCLS. Ingenuity pathway analysis confirmed that 'FXR/RXR activation' is the most significantly changed pathway upon OCA treatment. Comparison of gene expression profiles in hPCLS and mouse livers identified 18 common potential FXR targets. ChIP-sequencing in mouse liver confirmed FXR binding to IR1 sequences of Akap13, Cgnl1, Dyrk3, Pdia5, PPP1R3B and Tbx6. Conclusions: Our study shows that hPCLS respond to OCA treatment by upregulating well-known FXR target genes, demonstrating its suitability to study FXR-mediated gene regulation. We identified 6 novel bona-fide FXR target genes in both mouse and human liver. Finally, we discuss a possible explanation for changes in HDL/LDL observed in NASH and primary biliary cirrhosis patients treated with OCA based on the genomic expression profile in hPCLS.

DESIGN
Precision-cut liver slices, prepared from liver biopsies obtained from obese subjects undergoing bariatric surgery, were incubated with the FXRα agonist obeticholic acid (OCA, INT-747, 6α-ethyl-chenodeoxycholic acid) or vehicle for 24hrs, after which gene expression was profiled by array.

PLATFORM
GPL11532 [HuGene-1_1-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.1 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
26812075

