TITLE
Impact of miRNA Levels, Target-Site Complementarity and Cooperativity on ceRNA-Regulated Gene Expression

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Expression changes of competitive endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs) have been proposed to influence microRNA (miRNA) activity and thereby regulate other transcripts that contain miRNA binding sites. Here, we find that although miRNA levels define the extent of repression, they do not affect the magnitude of the ceRNA expression change required to observe derepression. Canonical 6-nt sites, which typically mediate modest repression, can nonetheless compete for miRNA binding, with potency ~20% of that observed for canonical 8-nt sites. Sites with extensive additional complementarity can be even more potent, but this occurs predominantly through miRNA degradation rather than competition. Cooperative binding of closely spaced sites for different miRNAs can also increase potency. These results provide quantitative insights into the stoichiometric relationship between miRNA and target abundance, target-site spacing and affinity requirements for ceRNA-mediated gene regulation and specify the unusual circumstances in which ceRNA-mediated gene regulation might be observed.

DESIGN
Sixty-four mRNA profiles were generated of 1) primary hepatocytes of mice expressing variable levels of a recombinant Adenovirus expressing the transcript of AldolaseA (Ad-AldoA), containing sites matching miR-122, let-7, miR-192, miR-194 or a mutated site (no site) or 2) embryonic stem (ES) cells that were transfected with a Tet-inducible dual-color reporter construct expressing enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (eYFP) and mCherry that contains zero (0s) or three (3s) 8 nt miRNA seed matches for miR-293 or miR-92 in the 3′ UTR. ES cells were sorted with a FACSAria IIIu flow cytometer into three bins based on their eYFP fluorescence intensity. All samples were sequenced in duplicates by an Illumina HiSeq 2500. Library preparation and sequencing were performed by Fasteris SA (Switzerland) or by the Functional Genomics Centre Zürich (FGCZ). Three small RNA profiles or either primary hepatocytes or embryonic stem cells were also generated by Solexa sequencing.

PLATFORM
GPL17021 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
27871486

