TITLE
Gene expression signature predicts induction treatment response and clinical outcome in adult Colombian patients with B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background. B-Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) represents a hematologic malignancy with poor clinical outcome and low survival rates in adult patients. Only 61% of Colombian adult patients with ALL achieve complete remission and a median overall survival of less than 11.3 months and event-free survival of 7.34 months. Identification of prognostic factors is crucial for proper treatment strategies and optimal results of therapy. The goal of our study was to determine if gene expression signatures correlate with response to therapy and to evaluate the utility of these as prognostic tools for survival to better predict patient risk prior to therapy. Methods and findings. This study included 43 adult patients newly diagnosed with B-cell precursor or common B-ALL. Through microarray gene expression profiles, we identified 442 genes differentially expressed between 27 leukemia patients who responded or not to induction chemotherapeutic treatment. Hierarchical analysis with the 99 most differentially expressed genes between the two groups revealed 3 sets of patients that differed in their clinical characteristics, giving these genes high prognostic clinical outcome impact. We validated the expression of 7 genes by RT-PCR in 43 patients, and in addition to finding a correlation with gene expression profiles, we established correlations with good and poor prognosis from the time of diagnosis. Conclusions. Our study suggests that the response to induction treatment and clinical outcome of patients can be predicted from the onset of the disease and that gene expression profiles can be used to stratify patient risk adequately and accurately. The present study represents the first that shows that gene expression profiling could become a clinically relevant tool for stratification in the early course of disease of Colombian adults B-ALL.

DESIGN
Stem cells from bone marrow samples from B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) patients responding or not to the inductive therapy were isolated by sorting, and the gene expression was compared between the two groups. This submission includes samples from 27 B-ALL patients and 3 healthy individuals.

