TITLE
Identification of circadian-related gene expression profiles in entrained MCF7

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Cancer cells have broken circadian clocks as compared to their normal tissue counterparts. Moreover, it has been shown in breast cancer that disruption of common circadian oscillations are associated to worse prognosis. Numerous studies focused at conical circadian genes in breast cancer cell lines have suggested that there are no mRNA circadian-like oscillations. Nevertheless, cancer cell lines have not been extensively characterized and it is unknown to what extent the circadian oscillations are disrupted. We have chosen representative breast cancer cell lines (MCF-10A, MCF-7, ZR-75-30, MDA-MB-231, and HCC-1954) in order to determine the degree which the circadian clock is damaged. We used serum shock to synchronize the circadian clocks in culture. Our aim was to observe the time course of gene expression using cDNA microarrays in the noncancerous MCF-10A and the cancerous MCF-7 cells and characterize specific genes in other cell lines. We used a cosine function to select highly correlated profiles. Some of the identified genes were validated by qPCR and further evaluated in the other breast cancer cell lines. Interestingly, we observed that breast cancer and noncancerous cultured cells are able to generate specific circadian expression profiles in response to the serum shock. The rhythmic genes suggested via microarray and measured in each particular subtype suggest that each breast cancer cell type respond differently to the circadian synchronization. Future results could identify circadian-like genes that are altered in breast cancer and noncancerous cells which can be used to propose novel treatments. Breast cell lines are potential models for in vitro studies of circadian clocks and clock-controlled pathways.

DESIGN
There are 8 total samples representing 0 to 28 hours in 4 hour intervals in MFC-7 breast cancer epitheleal cell line.

PLATFORM
GPL21250 Human Exonic Evidence Based Oligonucleotide (HEEBO) array [hoas.gal]

CITATIONS
27010605

