TITLE
Fucoidan alleviates high-fat diet-induced dyslipidemia and atherosclerosis in ApoEshl mice deficient in apolipoprotein E expression

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Fucoidan, a sulfated polysaccharide extracted from brown seaweeds, possesses many biological activities including anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant activities. We aimed to investigate the protective effects of fucoidan on dyslipidemia and atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice (ApoEshl mice) and to elucidate its molecular targets in the liver by using a transcriptomic approach. For 12 weeks, ApoEshl mice were fed a high-fat diet (HFD) supplemented with either 1% or 5% fucoidan. Fucoidan supplementation significantly reduced tissue weight (liver and white adipose tissue), blood lipid, total-cholesterol (TC), triglyceride (TG), non-high density lipoprotein-cholesterol (Non-HDL-C), and glucose levels in HFD-fed ApoEshl mice but increased plasma lipoprotein lipase (LPL) activity and HDL-C levels. Fucoidan also reduced hepatic steatosis levels (liver size, TC and TG levels, and lipid peroxidation) and increased white adipose tissue LPL activity. DNA microarray analysis and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction demonstrated differential expression of genes encoding proteins involved in lipid metabolism, energy homeostasis,  and insulin sensitivity, by activating Ppara and inactivating Srebf1. Fucoidan supplementation markedly reduced the thickness of the lipid-rich plaque, lipid peroxidation, and foaming macrophage accumulation in the aorta in HFD-fed ApoEshl mice. Thus, fucoidan supplementation appears to have anti-dyslipidemic and anti-atherosclerotic effects by inducing LPL activity and inhibiting the effects of inflammation and oxidative stress in HFD-fed ApoEshl mice.

DESIGN
Fucoidan were ingested by fed a high-fat diet supplemented with either 1% or 5% fucoidan. lipid and carbohydrate metabolism related gene expression profile in liver of ApoEshl mice was analyzed by DNA microarray.

