TITLE
Comparative gene expression analyses of purified CD14+ monocytes from human umbilical cord blood, CD14+ monocytes from adult peripheral blood and the cell therapy product DUOC-01

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
DUOC-01 is a macrophage-like cell therapy product manufactured from human umbilical cord blood (CB) mononuclear cells (MNCs) and intended for use in treatment of demyelinating diseases. During the 21-day manufacturing process, most initiating MNCs die in culture, but a highly active, adherent population of cells that resemble hematopoietic lineage macrophage in morphology, phagocytic activity, and antigen expression emerges; this population comprises the final DUOC-01 product [Kurtzberg et al. 2015]. Using the cuprizone-mediated murine demyelination model, we have found that DUOC-01 cells are capable of accelerating the remyelination process. In the same demyelination model, human cord blood-derived CD14+ cells (CBCD14) were less active. In another cellular therapy project, we have found that CBCD14 protects brain cells from oxygen-glucose-deprivation (OGD), but adult peripheral blood-derived CD14+ monocytes (PBCD14) did not. To address the functional differences between these cell types, we have analyzed differential gene expression by these three cell types.

DESIGN
We used four cord blood (CB) samples (from Carolinas Cord Blood Bank) that were collected within 24hrs of delivery. Then, highly purified CB CD14+ monocytes were isolated by flow sorting. We collected the peripheral blood (PB) from four healthy volunteers and isolated the purified PB CD14+ monocytes by cell sorting. Three separate batches of cultured DUOC-01 cells were collected from Robertson Cell and Translational Cell Therapy cGMP facility. Total RNAs were isolated at the same time and kept frozen. RNA samples were given to Duke Microarray core facility to analyse the gene expression profile using Affymetrix GeneChip® Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Assay.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

