TITLE
Identification of MMP12 as a potential new target for prevention and treatment of cardiometabolic disease

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Obesity is strongly associated with the metabolic syndrome, a compilation of risk factors that predispose individuals to the development of cardiometabolic disease (CMD), i.e. cardiovascular disease (CVD) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Controlling or preventing the worldwide epidemic of metabolic syndrome requires novel interventions to address this substantial health challenge. The objective of this study was the identification of potential new targets for the simultaneous prevention and treatment of insulin resistance and atherosclerosis, conditions that underlie T2DM and CVD, respectively. Therefore, we used an unbiased bioinformatics approach to identify molecules that are upregulated in both conditions by combining data from two microarray experiments and two meta-analyses. In the microarray experiments we compared gene expression in white adipose tissue (WAT) of obese mice as well as aortae of obese and atherosclerotic mice to respective lean controls. Furthermore, we performed a meta-analysis of published microarrays investigating atherosclerotic vessels and included a published meta-analysis on T2DM into our analyses. We obtained a pool of thirty-four genes that were upregulated in 3 out of the 4 underlying databases. These included well-known as well as novel crucial molecules for treatment of T2DM and CVD. Macrophage metalloelastase 12 (MMP12) was found highly ranked in all analyses and, therefore, chosen for further validation. Analyses of visceral and subcutaneous white adipose tissue from obese compared to lean mice and humans convincingly confirmed the up-regulation of MMP12 in obesity at mRNA, protein and, of note, activity levels. In conclusion, by this unbiased approach an interesting pool of potential molecular targets or biomarkers for treatment and prevention of CMD was identified with MMP12 being confirmed on multiple levels.

DESIGN
WT animals and LDLR-/- on a C57BL/6J background, purchased from Charles River Laboratories (Sulzfeld, Germany) were used. At 9 weeks of age the WT were placed for up to 20 weeks on high fat diet (HFD) (D12492; Research Diets Inc., New Brunswick, NJ, USA) and the LDLR-/- were placed for up to 20 weeks on sucrose-enriched high-fat diet (HFSC) (with 17.5 kcal% from sucrose; (D09071704, Research Diets Inc.). Their respective controls were kept on normal chow diet (NC) for up to 20 weeks. After sacrificing the gonadal white adipose tissue (GWAT) from WT animals on NC (Samples 1-6) or HFD (Samples 7-12)  was collected as well as the whole aortae from LDLR-/- animals on  NC (Samples 13-15) or HFSC (Samples16-18). The collected tissues were immediately snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. RNA was isolated for gene expression microarray analyses at the exon level (GeneChip Mouse Exon 2.0 ST Array, Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA). To isolate RNA, the frozen tissue samples were homogenized in TRIzol® reagent (Invitrogen/Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and processed based on manufacturer’s instructions. Total RNA (1μg) was then used for GeneChip analysis, individual samples were used in GWAT preparation and three samples were pooled and used for aorta preparations. Terminal-labeled cDNA, hybridization to genome-wide Mouse Gene 2.0 ST Gene Chips and scanning of the arrays were carried out according to the manufacture’s indications (Affymetrix). Output primary row data was analyzed with Expression Console software (Affymetrix).

PLATFORM
GPL16570 [MoGene-2_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 2.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
27385318

