TITLE
Drawing links from transcriptome to metabolites: the evolution of aroma in the ripening berry of Moscato bianco (Vitis vinifera L.)

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
Flavor and aroma play a major role in the perceived quality of grapes and wines. Among the most important compounds determining the oenological quality are monoterpenes. They confer typical floral notes to ‘Muscat’ varieties and, to a lesser extent, to other aromatic varieties. In recent years an increasing number of studies on the biosynthesis of terpenes in grape led to the identification and functional characterization of some enzymes and genes in this pathway. However, the underlying genetic map is still far from being complete. For example, the specific steps of monoterpene metabolism and its regulation are not known. With the aim of identifying new candidates for the missing links, we applied an integrative functional genomics approach based on the targeted metabolic and genome-wide transcript profiling of Moscato Bianco ripening berries. In particular, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of free and bound terpenoid compounds was combined with microarray analysis (14,562 probes) in the skins of berries collected at five developmental stages from pre-véraison to over-ripening. Differentially expressed metabolites and probesets were identified in the pairwise comparison between time points by using the early stage as a reference. Metabolic and transcriptomic data were integrated through pairwise correlation and clustering approaches to discover genes linked with particular metabolites or groups of metabolites. Finally, the candidate transcripts were checked for co-localization with QTLs controlling the level of aromatic compounds. The results provided novel insights into the biological networks of grapevine secondary metabolism, both at the regulatory and catalytic levels, and yielded a collection of previously undescribed genes related to the accumulation of target metabolites.

DESIGN
Berry skin RNA from developmental points 2 to 5 was hybridized competitively with RNA from point 1 (pre-véraison), following the dye-swap experiment design (Churchill, 2002). Developmental series.

PLATFORM
GPL6637 INRA Vitis vinifera 14k oligo array version 2.0

CITATIONS
28559906

