TITLE
Direct reprogramming of hepatic myofibroblasts into hepatocytes in vivo attenuates liver fibrosis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Direct induction of induced hepatocytes (iHeps) from fibroblasts holds potential as a strategy for regenerative medicine, but until now has only been shown in culture settings. Here, we describe in vivo iHep formation using transcription factor induction and genetic fate tracing in mouse models of chronic liver disease. We show that ectopic expression of the transcription factors FOXA3, GATA4, HNF1A and HNF4A from a polycistronic lentiviral vector converts mouse myofibroblasts into cells with a hepatocyte phenotype. In vivo expression of the same set of transcription factors from a p75 neurotrophin receptor peptide (p75NTRp)-tagged adenovirus enabled the generation of hepatocyte-like cells from myofibroblasts in fibrotic mouse livers and reduced liver fibrosis. We have therefore been able to convert profibrogenic myofibroblasts in the liver into hepatocyte-like cells with positive functional benefits. This direct in vivo reprogramming approach may open new avenues for the treatment of chronic liver disease.

DESIGN
Whole Mouse Genome Oligo Microarray v2 (4x44K) (Agilent Technologies) was used to characterize global gene expression profiles of iHeps compared to myofibroblasts and primary mouse hepatocytes. All microarrays were performed at the Research Core Unit Transcriptomics of the Hanover Medical School. Briefly, total RNA was used to prepare the aminoallyl-UTPmodified (aaUTP) cRNAs (Amino Allyl MessageAmp™ II Kit; #AM1753; Life Technologies) as directed by the company. The aaUTP-cRNAs were labelled with Alexa Fluor 555 Reactive Dye (#A32756; LifeTechnologies). Prior to the reverse transcription reaction, 1μl of a 1:5000 dilution of Agilent’s One-Color spike-in Kit stock solution (#5188-5282, Agilent Technologies) was added to 100ng of total RNA of each analyzed sample. The cRNA fragmentation, hybridization, and washing steps were carried out according to Agilent’s One-Color Microarray-Based Gene Expression Analysis Protocol V5.7 except that 500ng of each labelled cRNA sample were used for hybridization. Slides were scanned on the Agilent Micro Array Scanner G2565 CA (pixel resolution 5 μm, bit depth 20). Data extraction was performed with the Feature Extraction Software V10.7.3.1. 12 samples were analyzed: Pr-mHSC: Primary myofibroblasts derived from hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), 2 replicates; In-vivo iHep: In-vivo myofibroblasts-derived from induced hepatocytes (iHep), 3 replicates; In-vivo eHep: In-vivo endogenous hepatocytes (eHep), 3 replicates; In-vitro iHep: In-vitro myofibroblasts-derived from induced hepatocytes (iHep), 3 replicates; PH24h: Primary hepatocytes (PH) cultured for 24 hours, 1 replicate.

