TITLE
DNA methylation status of the liver of MAT1A WT and MAT1A KO mice treated with placebo or SAMe during 8 weeks

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Methionine adenosyltransferase (MAT) enzymes generate SAMe (S-adenosylmethionine), the main biological methyl donor. There are two MAT encoding genes in mammals (Mat1a and Mat2a), which show different activities and cellular distribution. Mat1a encodes the enzyme mainly expressed in normal liver. Mat1a ablation in mice results in the spontaneous development of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). We observed that SAMe depletion in Mat1a KO mice had three main effects on hepatic lipid metabolism: 1) impaired TG (triglyceride) export via VLDL; 2) impaired mitochondrial FA (fatty acid) oxidation (as evidenced by membrane depolarization, downregulation of Phb1 (prohibitin 1, a mitochondrial chaperone protein) and Mcj/Dnajc15 (endogenous mitochondrial repressor of respiratory chain), and accumulation of long-chain acylcarnitines); and 3) increased FA uptake. The convergence of these three factors induced TG accumulation in LD (lipid droplets). LD expansion confronts hepatocytes with a high demand of PC (phosphatidylcholine) molecules to cover the LD surface since other phospholipids, such as PE (phosphatidylethanolamine), cannot stabilize LD and prevent coalescence. In Mat1a KO this situation is aggravated, since SAMe-dependent PC synthesis via PE methylation is decreased, the PC/PE ratio reduced and mitochondrial FA oxidation impaired. To put a brake to this drain of PC molecules to LD, FA are rerouted in Mat1a KO mice liver to other catabolic (endoplasmic reticulum and peroxisome oxidation) and biosynthetic (ceramides synthesis) pathways, causing oxidative stress, inflammation and fibrosis. SAMe treatment for two months in 8-9 month old Mat1a KO mice ameliorated mitochondrial dysfunction (reduces membrane depolarization, improves Phb1 and Mcj expression, and increases SAMe transport to mitochondria) improving FA oxidation efficiency (FA and acylcarnitine levels decrease), which results in a drastic reduction in TG accumulation. SAMe treatment in Mat1a KO mice resulted in more PC available for proper membrane function, improving liver lipid homeostasis, histology (H & E, Sudan red, Sirius red) and liver injury (ALT, AST).

DESIGN
DNA methylome maps of MAT1A WT and KO mice treated or not with SAMe

PLATFORM
GPL16173 Illumina HiScanSQ (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
28132890

