TITLE
Genome-wide methylation analysis of DNMT3B gene isoforms revealed specific methylation profiles in breast cell lines

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Both DNA methylation and alternative splicing represent mechanisms closely involved in regulation of gene expression and are well known to be involved in cancer susceptibility and development.   Human DNA methylation is introduced into DNA by enzymes of the DNA cytosine methyltransferases family, which includes DNMT3B. The DNMT3B protein allows a de novo DNA methylation activity, which is a key mechanism involved in the transformation of normal cell into cancer cell. The DNMT3B3 isoform is overexpressed in cancerous tissues and tumor cell lines, and could act as a dominant negative factor. This isoform was found to be highly expressed in our cohort of non-BRCA1/2 families. Using Infinium Human Methylation 450 BeadChips, we undertook the characterization of the specific methylation profile associated with this DNMT3B3 isoform and its DNMT3B2 wild type counterpart in ER/PR-positive and –negative breast cancer cell lines.  A large spectrum of DNMT3B3/DNMT3B2 expression ratio values was observed in cancer and non-cancerous cell lines. Based on their methylation profiles, hierarchical clustering of parental cell lines revealed clustering of cells based on their ER/PR status. Overexpression of DNMT3B3 triggered methylation changes of thousands of CpG sites in MCF7, T-47D, MDA-MB-231 and MCF10A cells. These methylated loci were distributed in similar proportion over the 22 autosomal chromosomes and genomic locations such as promoter, gene body or intergenic regions. Pathways associated with genes containing these differentially methylated CpG sites were also determined regarding their enrichment. Moreover, based on the trend of methylation changes, the results suggest an anti-proliferative effect of the DNMT3B3 isoform through negative effect on its wild-type isoform counterpart DNMT3B2.   To our knowledge, this study represents the first exhaustive analysis describing specific methylation profile triggered by modulated expression of DNMT3B isoforms and revealed specific genes and pathways, which could significantly regulate cell growth and proliferation as well as other biological and molecular mechanisms.

DESIGN
For each cell line treatment, between 3 and 6 replicates have been performed. Cell line treatments include negative controls such as untreated, scramble shRNA-transduced+empty vector-transfected as well as empty vector-transfected only.  A total of 94 samples have been analyzed which include all appropriate treatments in 7 different cell lines namely MCF7, T-47D, CAMA1, ZR-75-1, MDA-231, BT549 and MCF10A. The main goal was to generate extreme (low and high) gene expression ratios of DNMT3B3/DNMT3B2 in each cell line.

PLATFORM
GPL13534 Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (HumanMethylation450_15017482)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

