TITLE
PRRSV counteracts type I interferon-induced antiviral state

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome (PRRS) is an economically important  disease with a significant impact on the pig industry. It is caused by PRRS virus  (PRRSV), which predominantly infects and replicates in porcine pulmonary alveolar  macrophages (PAMs), providing a useful in vitro model for understanding the host  immune response to PRRSV infection. We pretreated PAMs with porcine IFN-α to  induce an antiviral state within the cells and subsequently infected them with highly  pathogenic (HP)-PRRSV. Changes in global gene expression in IFN-α-pretreated  PAMs in response to HP-PRRSV infection were determined by RNA-sequence  analysis. A total of 346 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were transcriptionally upregulated  by porcine IFN-α. Among these up-regulated DEGs, 93 showed significantly  attenuated expression levels in response to HP-PRRSV infection. These attenuated  DEGs were remarkably enriched in immune-response-related terms, such as 'RIG-Ilike  receptor signaling pathway', 'Response to virus', and 'Response to stimulus'.  Notably, expression levels of 93.8% (15/16) of antiviral genes (such as PKR, OAS1,  IFIT1(ISG56) and ISG15), and genes encoding retinoic-acid-inducible gene-I protein  (LOC100737466(DDX58), a cytoplasmic viral RNA sensor), interferon regulatory factor  7 (IRF7, a key transcriptional regulator of type I IFN-dependent immune response),  signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (LOC100738308(STAT1), a  transcription factor for IFN-stimulated genes), and tumor necrosis factor-related  apoptosis-inducing ligand (TNFSF10, a cytokine initiating proapoptotic signaling  cascades) were significantly attenuated by HP-PRRSV infection. These results suggest  that HP-PRRSV can counteract the type I IFN-induced antiviral state by interfering with  the expression of genes involved in the host-defense response.

DESIGN
Highly pathogenic porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus counteracts type I interferon-induced antiviral state by interfering with the expression of hostdefense genes

PLATFORM
GPL21332 Ion Torrent Proton (Sus scrofa)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

