TITLE
Ventilator-induced lung injury in wild-type and jnk1 knockout mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background: Mechanical ventilation causes ventilator-induced lung injury in animals and humans. Mitogen-activated protein kinases have been implicated in ventilator-induced lung injury though their functional significance remains incomplete. We characterize the role of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase/ mitogen activated protein kinase kinase-3 and c-Jun-NH2-terminal kinase-1 in ventilator-induced lung injury and investigate novel independent mechanisms contributing to lung injury during mechanical ventilation. Methodology and Principle Findings: C57/BL6 wild-type mice and mice genetically deleted for mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase-3 (mkk-3-/-) or c-Jun-NH2-terminal kinase-1 (jnk1-/-) were ventilated, and lung injury parameters were assessed. We demonstrate that mkk3-/- or jnk1-/- mice displayed significantly reduced inflammatory lung injury and apoptosis relative to wild-type mice.  Since jnk1-/- mice were highly resistant to ventilator-induced lung injury, we performed comprehensive gene expression profiling of ventilated wild-type or jnk1-/- mice to identify novel candidate genes which may play critical roles in the pathogenesis of ventilator-induced lung injury.  Microarray analysis revealed many novel genes differentially expressed by ventilation including matrix metalloproteinase-8 (MMP8) and GADD45a. Functional characterization of MMP8 revealed that mmp8-/- mice were sensitized to ventilator-induced lung injury with increased lung vascular permeability. Conclusions: We demonstrate that mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways mediate inflammatory lung injury during ventilator-induced lung injury. C-Jun-NH2-terminal kinase was also involved in alveolo-capillary leakage and edema formation, whereas MMP8 inhibited alveolo-capillary protein leakage. Keywords: response to injury, genetically modified mouse

DESIGN
We analyzed the gene expression patterns of 3 control a 4 ventilated mice`s lungs in both wild type and jnk1 knockout animals.

PLATFORM
GPL5145 UPMC_PACCM_MOUSE_20K_14

CITATIONS
18270588

