TITLE
BET bromodomain proteins Brd2, Brd3 and Brd4 selectively regulate metabolic pathways in the pancreatic β-cell

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Displacement of Bromodomain and Extra-Terminal (BET) proteins from chromatin has promise for cancer and inflammatory disease treatments, but roles of BET proteins in metabolic disease remain unexplored. Small molecule BET inhibitors, such as JQ1, block BET protein binding to acetylated lysines, but lack selectivity within the BET family (Brd2, Brd3, Brd4, Brdt), making it difficult to disentangle contributions of each family member to transcriptional and cellular outcomes. Here, we demonstrate multiple improvements in pancreatic β-cells upon BET inhibition with JQ1 or BET-specific siRNAs. JQ1 (50-400 nM) increases insulin secretion from INS-1 cells in a concentration dependent manner. JQ1 increases insulin content in INS-1 cells, accounting for increased secretion, in both rat and human islets. Higher concentrations of JQ1 decrease intracellular triglyceride stores in INS-1 cells, a result of increased fatty acid oxidation. Specific inhibition of both Brd2 and Brd4 enhances insulin transcription, leading to increased insulin content. Inhibition of Brd2 alone increases fatty acid oxidation. Overlapping yet discrete roles for individual BET proteins in metabolic regulation suggest new isoform-selective BET inhibitors may be useful to treat insulin resistant/diabetic patients. Results imply that cancer and diseases of chronic inflammation or disordered metabolism are related through shared chromatin regulatory mechanisms.

DESIGN
BET proteins are not redundant in their functions, thus pan-BET inhibitors like JQ1 cannot properly be interpreted without specific RNA knockdown or small molecules of proven selectivity. Here, we expose INS-1 cells, a rat insulinoma model for the pancreatic beta cell, to selective siRNAs to ablate Brd2, Brd3 or Brd4 mRNAs and compared genome-wide changes in transcription to non-targeted siRNA control. As expected, three resolvably different patterns of gene expression were identified, establishing that each BET protein controls its own set of target genes.

