TITLE
Genome-wide analysis of gene expression during adipogenesis in human adipose-derived mesenchymal stromal cells reveals novel patterns of gene expression during adipocyte differentiation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
To better understand the scale of gene expression changes that occur during the formation of mature adipocytes from preadipocytes, we compared and characterised the transcriptome profile of mesenchymal stromal cells derived from human adipose tissue, otherwise known as adipose-derived stromal cells (ASCs), undergoing adipocyte differentiation on day 1, 7, 14 and 21 (representing the early to late stage process of adipogenesis).  Microarray technique was systematically employed to study gene expression in adipose-derived stromal cells during adipogenic differentiation over a 21 day period to identify genes that are important in driving adipogenesis in humans. We have undertaken an in-depth transcriptome analysis of adipogenesis in human adipose-derived stromal cells (ASCs) induced to differentiate into adipocytes in vitro. Genes were differentially expressed on days 1, 7, 14 and 21 post-induction and numbered 128, 218, 253 and 240 respectively. Up-regulated genes were associated with neural and blood vessel development, leukocyte migration, and tumor growth, invasion and metastasis. They also shared common pathways with certain obesity-related pathophysiological conditions.  Down-regulated genes were associated with osteogenesis and the immune response. KLF15, LMO3, FOXO1 and ZBTB16 transcription factors were up-regulated throughout the differentiation process. CEBPA, PPARG, ZNF117, MLXIPL, MMP3 and RORB were up-regulated only on days 14 - 21, which coincides with the maturation of adipocytes and could possibly serve as candidates for controlling fat accumulation and the size of mature adipocytes. We identified genes that were up-regulated only on day 1 - 7 and day 14 - 21 that could serve as potential early and late-stage differentiation markers. This study reveals potential markers for the different stages in ASC adipogenic differentiation which could serve as good candidates to combat obesity and further link the biology of fat cell formation to the co-morbidities of obesity.

DESIGN
RNA was extracted from both adipogenic induced adipose-derived stromal cell cultures and their respective controls (non-induced) on day 1, 7, 14 and 21. The RNA were hybridized to Affymetrix HuGene 2.0 ST arrays

PLATFORM
GPL16686 [HuGene-2_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 2.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
27108396

