TITLE
POU2AF1 Functions in the Human Airway Epithelium to Regulate Expression of Host Defense Genes [array]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In the process of seeking novel lung host defense regulators by analyzing genome-wide RNA sequence data from normal human airway epithelium, we detected expression of POU2AF1, a known transcription co-factor previously thought to be expressed only in lymphocytes. Lymphocyte contamination of human airway epithelial samples obtained by bronchoscopy and brushing was excluded by immunohistochemistry staining, the observation of up-regulation of POU2AF1 in purified airway basal stem/progenitor cells undergoing differentiation and analysis of differentiating single basal cell clones. Lentivirus-mediated up-regulation of POU2AF1 in airway basal cells induced up-regulation of host defense genes, including MX1, IFIT3, IFITM and known POU2AF1 downstream genes HLA-DRA, ID2, ID3, IL6, BCL6. Interestingly, expression of these genes paralleled changes of POU2AF1 expression during airway epithelium differentiation in vitro, suggesting POU2AF1 helps to maintain a " host defense tone " even in pathogen-free condition. Cigarette smoke, a known risk factor for airway infection, suppressed POU2AF1 expression both in vivo in humans and in vitro in human airway epithelial cultures, accompanied by deregulation of POU2AF1 downstream genes. Finally, enhancing POU2AF1 expression in human airway epithelium attenuated the suppression of host defense genes by smoking. Together, these findings suggest a novel function of POU2AF1 as a potential regulator of host defense genes in the human airway epithelium. Methods: Massive parallel RNA sequencing was used to compare the transcriptome of lentivirus mediated POU2AF1 or RFP (control) gene expression in human primary airway epithelial cells (3 samples per group). Uninfected basal cell was used as a further control. Conclusions: The genes up-regulated by POU2AF1 in human airway epithelial cells are mainly related to the intracellular or extracellular anti-pathogen response, suggesting POU2AF1 plays a role in airway epithelial host defense.

DESIGN
This Series represents samples complementary to those in GSE60989.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
26927796

