TITLE
Expression miRNA data from human postmortem putamen samples measured using the NanoString nCounter platform

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Molecular adaptations in the striatum mediated by dopamine (DA) denervation or Levodopa (L-dopa) treatment have been implicated with the motor deficits found in Parkinson’s disease (PD). Alterations in glutamatergic neurotransmission and anti-oxidant mechanisms are reported to play important roles in mediating these changes. However, the mechanisms mediating the molecular adaptations in the striatum are not well understood. In recent years, microRNAs (miRNAs) have been recognized as potent post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression with fundamental roles in numerous biological processes. miRNAs are known to influence the development and maintenance of striatal neurons. Therefore, we sought to determine the genome-wide expression levels of miRNAs in PD striatal tissues. Methods: Using a digital gene expression platform to quantify miRNA levels, we compared the expression of 800 miRNAs in human postmortem putamen tissues from PD patients and controls. Results: We detected the expression of approximately 250 miRNAs in postmortem human putamen samples collected from patients with PD and healthy controls. There was an abundance of a subset of 17 miRNAs (10 up- and 7 down-regulated) differing substantially between PD and the control tissues. Conclusions: We identified deregulated miRNAs most likely associated with altered striatal functions found in PD. This approach may provide insight into pathogenesis and additional therapeutic targets for the development novel treatment strategies for the disease.

DESIGN
Human postmortem putamen tissues from 12 patients with PD symptoms and 12 neurologically normal controls. Samples were obtained from the Human Brain and Spinal Fluid Resource Center, Los Angeles, CA through NIH NeuroBioBank, and stored at -80°C until RNA isolation. Total RNA was extracted using the miRVana RNA isolation kit, following the manufacturer’s instructions (Ambion). Using 225ng total RNA, miRNA levels were assayed by direct digital detection using Nanostring miRNA assay kits (Nanostring Technologies).

