TITLE
Affect of Interferon Gamma on Chordoma Cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
IFN-g-induced gene expression profiles of UM-Chor1 cells were assessed by microarray analysis Chordoma is a rare bone tumor derived from notochord, which has shown to be resistant to conventional therapy, including chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Immunotherapy has the potential to be effective in cancers with resistance to conventional therapy. Checkpoint inhibition, including Programmed cell Death 1 (PD-1)/Programmed cell Death protein 1 (PD-L1) blockade has shown great promise in treating diverse cancers. The purpose of this study was to investigate the potential of anti-PD-L1 antibody therapy for chordoma. To this end, using 4 chordoma cell lines, we examined the expression of PD-L1 and performed in vitro NK cells killing assay for antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) activity mediated by the anti-PD-L1 antibody, avelumab. Here, the expression of PD-L1 was markedly upregulated by IFN-g in all 4 chordoma cell lines, which resulted in increasing the sensitivity to ADCC. Next, to model a patient that received a tumor-antigen specific vaccine, chordoma cells were co-incubated with brachyury specific CD8+ T cells, culminating in significant upregulation of PD-L1 on the tumor cells mediated by CD8+ T cells IFN-g production. The functional consequence was the sensitivity of chordoma cells to ADCC mediated by avelumab. Finally, residential cancer stem cell subpopulations of chordoma cells were killed by avelumab-mediated ADCC to the same degree as non-cancer stem cell populations. Our findings show the potential of avelumab therapy in chordoma; a) alone, to enable endogenous NK cells to kill chordoma cells via ADCC, or b) in conjunction with T cells immunotherapy such a vaccine, to exploit enhanced NK cell killing of chordoma cells via ADCC.

DESIGN
UM-Chor1 cells were treated or untreated with 50 ng/mL of IFN-gamma for 24 hours. Three replicates of control (C1) or treated (G1) were analyzed.

PLATFORM
GPL19251 [HuGene-2_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 2.0 ST Array [probe set (exon) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

