TITLE
The multifaceted RisA regulon of Bordetella pertussis

ORGANISM
Bordetella pertussis

SUMMARY
Bordetella pertussis, the etiological agent of whooping cough, regulates the expression of its virulence factors by the well-defined BvgA/S two-component regulatory system. Phosphorylated BvgA activates the virulence activated genes (vags) and represses via the activation of the bvgR gene the expression of the virulence repressed genes (vrgs). In the presence of MgSO4, known as modulating condition, the BvgA/S system is inactive, and the vrgs are expressed. Here, we show that, except for 6 genes of unknown function, the expression of all the vrgs depends on RisA, another transcriptional two-component regulator. In addition to the vrgs, RisA also regulates the expression of a  many other genes. Whereas the expression of most vags was not affected by the deletion of risA, some vags, including the genes coding for pertactin, filamentous hemagglutinin, fimbriae and adenylate cyclase toxin, were surprisingly no longer modulated by MgSO4 in the risA- background. Yet another set of genes, mostly of unknown function, were modulated only in the risA- background. Finally, a large group of genes were up-regulated under modulating conditions only in the risA- background. They comprise genes of the chemotaxis and flagellar operons, iron-regulated genes, some of which are under the control of BvgA/S, while others are not. We identified RisK as the cognate RisA kinase, and found that most of the RisA-dependent genes also required RisK for expression, whereas a few genes were independent of RisK. These results were confirmed by the replacement of RisA with the phosphoablative RisAD60N analog and the phosphomimetic RisAD60E analog. Thus, according to its phosphorylation state, RisA regulates the expression of many genes, which may or may not also be regulated by the BvgA/S system, adding a new layer of complexity of B. pertussis gene regulation.

DESIGN
Comparison of mutant strains with their corresponding parental wild type strains using 2 to 4 Biological replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL19266 Bordetella pertussis Whole genome array

CITATIONS
27620673

