TITLE
Prospective randomized doubleblind assessment of transcriptome modulation by hydrocortisone in severe burn shock

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Rationale: Despite shortening vasopressor use in shock, hydrocortisone administration remains controversial, with potential harm on the immune system. Few studies assessed hydrocortisone  impact on the transcriptional response in shock, and we are lacking data in burns.   Objectives: To assess the hydrocortisone-induced transcriptional modulation in severe burn shock, particularly on the immune response.  Methods: We collected whole blood samples (n= 117) during a randomized controlled trial assessing the efficacy of hydrocortisone administration on burn shock. Using whole genome microarrays, we first compared burn patients from the placebo group (n=15) to healthy volunteers (n=13) to describe the transcriptional modulation induced by burn shock over the first week. Then we compared burn patients randomized for either hydrocortisone administration (n=15) or placebo (n=15) to assess hydrocortisone-induced modulation.  Measurements and Main Results: Study groups were similar in terms of severity and major outcomes, but shock duration (significantly reduced in the hydrocortisone group). Many genes (n=2250) were differentially expressed between burn patients and healthy volunteers, with 85% of them exhibiting a profound and persistent modulation over seven days. Interestingly, we showed that hydrocortisone enhanced the shock-associated repression of adaptive, but also innate immunity.   Conclusions: We found that the initial host response to burn shock encompasses a wide and persistent modulation of gene expression, with profound modulation of pathways associated with metabolism and immunity. Importantly, hydrocortisone administration may worsen the immunosuppression associated with severe injury. These data should be taken into account in the risk ratio of hydrocortisone administration in patients with inflammatory shock.

DESIGN
Prospective randomized double blind study comparing hydrocortisone administration to placebo (NaCl 0.9%). Whole blood samples were collected at inclusion (S1, before treatment administration), one day after (S2, one day after treatment administration), and at a median of 120h (S3, 120h after treatment administration) and 168h (S4, 168h after treatment administration). 13 healthy volunteers (HV) were sampled to provide control for the microarray experiments.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
28623938

