TITLE
Phenotypic Diversity and Altered Environmental Plasticity in Arabidopsis thaliana with Reduced HSP90 Levels

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
The molecular chaperone HSP90 aids the maturation of a diverse but select set of metastable protein clients, many of which are key to a variety of signal transduction pathways.  HSP90 function has been best investigated in animal and fungal systems, where inhibition of the chaperone has exceptionally diverse effects, ranging from reversing oncogenic transformation to facilitating the acquisition of drug resistance.  Inhibition of HSP90 in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana uncovers novel morphologies dependent on normally cryptic genetic variation and increases stochastic variation inherent to developmental processes.  The biochemical activity of HSP90 is strictly conserved between animals and plants.   However, the substrates and pathways dependent on HSP90 in plants are poorly understood.  Progress has been impeded by reliance on light-sensitive HSP90 inhibitors due to redundancy in the A. thaliana HSP90 gene family.  Here we present phenotypic and genome-wide expression analyses of A. thaliana with constitutively reduced HSP90 levels achieved by RNAi targeting.  HSP90 reduction affects a variety of quantitative life-history traits, including flowering time and total seed set, and decreases developmental stability.  Further, by quantitative analysis of morphological phenotypes, we demonstrate that HSP90-reduction increases phenotypic diversity in both seedlings and adult plants.  Several morphologies are synergistically affected by HSP90 and growth temperature.  Genome-wide expression analyses also suggest a central role for HSP90 in the genesis and maintenance of plastic responses.  The expression results are substantiated by examination of the response of HSP90-reduced plants to attack by caterpillars of the generalist herbivore Trichoplusia ni.  HSP90 reduction potentiates a more robust herbivore defense response.  In sum, we propose that HSP90 exerts global effects on the environmental responsiveness of plants to many different stimuli.  The comprehensive set of HSP90-reduced lines described here is a vital instrument to further examine the role of HSP90 as a central interface between organism, development, and environment. Keywords: HSP90, mutant comparison

DESIGN
Three differerent experiments were performed.  One experiment included lines RNAi-A1, RNAi-A3, and Control-2, with two biological replicates and one technical replicate per line.   The second included lines RNAi-A2, RNAi-B1, RNAi-C1, Control-1, and Control-3, with three biological replicates per line.  The third included the three single-isoform T-DNA insertion lines, along with the Col-0 control, with three biological replicates per line.  See Sangster et al. " Phenotypic Diversity and Altered Environmental Plasticity in Arabidopsis thaliana with Reduced HSP90 Levels " for details of construct construction and further experimental rationale.

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
17653275

