TITLE
Somatic mutation spectrum in monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance indicates a simpler genomic landscape compared to multiple myeloma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) is a premalignant precursor of multiple myeloma (MM) with a 1% risk of progression per year. Although targeted analyses have shown the presence of specific genetic abnormalities such as IGH translocations, RB1 deletion, 1q gain, hyperdiploidy or RAS genes mutations, little is known about the molecular mechanism of malignant transformation. We have performed whole-exome sequencing together with CGH+SNP array analysis in 33 flow-cytometry separated abnormal plasma cell samples from MGUS patients to describe somatic gene mutations and chromosome changes at the genome-wide level. Non-synonymous mutations and copy-number alterations were present in 97.0% and in 60.6% of cases, respectively. Importantly, the number of somatic mutations was significantly lower in MGUS compared to MM (p < 10-4) and we have identified six genes that are significantly mutated in MM (KRAS, NRAS, DIS3, HIST1H1E, EGR1 and LTB) in the MGUS dataset. We also found a positive correlation with increasing chromosome changes and somatic mutations. IGH translocations were present in 27.3% of cases comprising t(4;14), t(11;14), t(14;16) or t(14;20) and were in a similar frequency to MM, which corresponded with the primary lesion hypothesis. Data from this study showed MGUS is a genetically comprehensive disease, however, overall genetic instability is significantly lower compared to MM.

DESIGN
Overall, 33 MGUS patients were included in this study. Genomic DNA was isolated from flow-cytometry separated abnormal plasma cells and analysed by CGH+SNP arrays to describe somatic gene mutations and chromosome changes at genome-wide level. Agilent Human Reference DNA was used as reference DNA.

PLATFORM
GPL11358 Agilent-029830 Human Genome CGH + SNP Microarray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
28550183

