TITLE
Osteoclastic estrogen receptor alpha mediates the osteoprotective estrogen action through Fas ligand signaling

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Estrogen clearly prevents osteoporotic bone loss by attenuating bone resorption. The molecular basis of how this is accomplished, however, remains elusive. Here we report a critical role of osteoclastic ERa in mediating estrogen action on bone in females. We selectively ablated ERa in differentiated osteoclasts (ERa dOc/dOc). ERa dOc/dOc females, but not males, exhibited clear trabecular bone loss, similar to the osteoporotic bone phenotype in post-menopausal women. Recovery of bone loss by estrogen treatment of the ovariectomized ERa dOc/dOc females was ineffective in the trabecular areas of the long bones and lumbar vertebral bodies. Osteoclastic apoptosis, induced by estrogen, occurred simultaneously with up-regulation of Fas ligand (FasL) expression in intact trabecular bones of ERa +/+mice, but not in ERa dOc/dOc mice.  ERa was also required for similar effects of estrogen and tamoxifen in cultured osteoclasts. These findings suggest that the osteoprotective actions of estrogen and SERMS are mediated at least in part through osteoclastic ERa in trabecular bone; and the life span of mature osteoclasts is regulated through activation of the Fas/FasL system. Keywords: Study about estrogen response of osteoclast-specific estrogen receptor alpha mice

DESIGN
Wild type and osteoclast-specific Estrogen Receptor alpha knock-out mice were ovariectomized. The number of both genotypes of mice was eight. The mice of each genotypes were divided to vehicle control and estrogen treated group. Four hours after chemical treatment, the distal 5 mm of the left femurs were harvested after sacrificing by cervical dislocation and total RNAs were purified for Affymetix GeneChip microarray analysis without pooling. Therefore, this experiment consists of four groups with four replicates per group.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
17803905

