TITLE
Transcriptome profiles of human hepatic stellate cells (LX2 and TWNT4) with overexpression of unspliced or spliced XBP1 gene

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
BACKGROUND AND AIM: We previously established that endoplasmic reticulum stress leads to unfolded protein response (UPR) that promotes liver fibrosis by activating hepatic stellate cell (HSC). We aimed to determine the role of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), one of three UPR effector pathways, in the fibrogenic HSC activation. METHODS: XBP1 expression was measured by qPCR in tunicamycin-treated human HSC lines (TWNT4 and LX2) and culture-activated human primary HSCs. XBP1 was overexpressed in primary human HSCs and the HSC lines, and fibrogenic genes (COL1A1, ACTA2, PDGFRB, MMP2, TIMP1) and encoded proteins were assessed by qPCR and Western blotting, respectively. Autophagy was inhibited by knockdown of ATG7. Genome-wide transcriptome profiling was performed to determine modulated molecular pathway by XBP1. In vivo XBP1 activation was assessed in transcriptome datasets of fibrotic mouse models and immunohistochemistry of human liver tissues. RESULTS: XBP1 overexpression accompanied both tunicamycin- and culture-based HSC activation. Ectopic overexpression of XBP1 induced fibrogenic gene expression in the HSC lines, which was inhibited by knockdown of ATG7. UPR pathway together with PDGFRB pathway, a hallmark of HSC activation, were induced in transcriptome profiles of XBP1-transduced HSC lines. Some known fibrogenic pathways such as transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta pathway were not induced, suggesting partial contribution of XBP1 to the entire fibrogenic HSC activation machinery. XBP1 target gene signature defined in our XBP1-overexpressing HSC lines was significantly induced in liver tissue transcriptome profiles of carbon tetrachloride-treated or bile duct-ligated mouse models, and XBP1 and alpha-smooth muscle actin (encoded by ACTA2, another hallmark of HSC activation) were co-localized in human fibrotic liver tissues, collectively supporting involvement of XBP1 in HSC activation and fibrogesis in vivo. CONCLUSIONS: XBP1-mediated UPR is at least partially responsible for fibrogenic HSC activation via autophagy.

DESIGN
Human hepatic stellate cell lines (LX2 and TWNT4) were lentivirally transduced by either unspliced or spliced XBP1 gene and cultured for 96h.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
27996033

