TITLE
Gene transcription analysis of Daphnia magna multigenerations exposed to carbendazim

ORGANISM
Daphnia magna

SUMMARY
Pesticides are continuously released into the environment, with possible long-term consequences on aquatic organisms. One of the pesticides still applied in several crops in some countries is the fungicide carbendazim, ending up in surface waters with concentrations reaching 5 µg/L. Daphnia magna (clone k6) was used in this study as a model organism and it was exposed to a sub-lethal concentration of carbendazim (5 µg/L) for twelve generations. Gene expression alterations induced by this compound were assessed in the F0 and F12 generations using D. magna custom microarrays. Results revealed that carbendazim caused changes at the gene expression level in both generations. Genes involved in response to stress, DNA replication/repair, neurotransmission, protein biosynthesis, ATP production, lipids and carbohydrates metabolism were the most affected in both F0 and F12, although a lower number of differentially expressed genes were observed in the F12 generation exposed to carbendazim. The exposure of daphnids to carbendazim did not cause a stable change in gene expression from F0 to F12 generations. Effects at the gene expression level were early detected at the F0 generation after a short-time exposure (10 days), highlighting the advantages of using high throughput tools as early warning analysis but also providing information on chemical mode of action, which can add value in risk assessment procedures.

DESIGN
For the microarray experiment, neonates with less than 24h were picked from the F0 and F12 generations from both clean medium and carbendazim. Three replicates per each treatment were used and consisted of 5 daphnids aging 10 days old.    A total of three replicates per treatment were used and each biological replicate was individually hybridized on the array. A single-color design was used, using the Agilent one-color RNA Spike-In Kit (AgilentTechnologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), following the manufacturers protocol.

