TITLE
Mammary gland transcriptome study in heifers

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
A better understanding of impacts of nutrition during pre- weaning and post- weaning period is needed in order to design feeding strategies that optimize lifetime productivity. Therefore, the objectives of the present study were three-fold: to evaluate nutrition-induced changes of 1) growth from birth to first calving in heifers, 2) its impact on first-lactation milk yield and composition and 3) evaluate nutrition-induced changes in gene expression of mammary gland in Parda de Montaña heifers. Sixteen Parda de Montaña heifers, were randomly but equally assigned at birth to one of four management strategies, in a 2 x 2 factorial experiment. In the pre-weaning period (0-6 months of age), all the heifers suckled their dams twice daily for 30 minutes. Half of the heifers (n=8) were supplemented a starter concentrate (CON) while the other half only had access to their dam’s milk (NOCON). In the post-weaning period (6-15 months), half of the heifers of each pre-weaning feeding treatment received alfalfa hay ad libitum plus concentrates, with a different forage to concentrate ratio (F:C), 67:33 (67F:33C) or 87:13 (87F:13C). Plasma metabolites and hormones concentration at weaning was determined, and cows and their calves weigh was recorded once/week throughout the first lactation, and their ADG was calculated. Milk composition and quantity was determined during the first 4 months of lactation. Mammary tissue samples were taken by biopsy at weaning at the end of first lactation.  RNA mammary gland samples (n=16, 8 samples from each treatment) were analyzed by using Bovine Gene 1.1 ST Array Strip. The results of the present study showed that heifers that received concentrate during pre- weaning period had greater BW at weaning when compared to NOCON heifers. Concentrate supplementation during the pre-weaning period increased heifers’ weight gains in the pre-weaning period (P < 0.001) but decreased weight gains in the post-weaning period (P < 0.01) and during pregnancy (P < 0.05). In addition, CON cows had lower milk production throughout the 4 months of the first lactation when compared with NOCON (P < 0.01). Moreover CON cows had decreased milk crude protein, crude fat, lactose, extract and casein content in their first lactation. In addition, cows that received concentrate during pre- weaning period showed greater SCC at the third and fourth month of lactation. Different gene expression patterns were found between CON and NOCON animals. Overall, concentrate supplementation at pre- weaning resulted in up –regulation of genes related with immune response and chemokine activity, suggesting that these animals might be in a compromised immune status, probably being at greater risk to develop mastitis in the later periods.

DESIGN
Sixteen Parda de Montaña heifers, were randomly but equally assigned at birth to one of four management strategies, in a 2 x 2 factorial experiment. In the pre-weaning period (0-6 months of age), all the heifers suckled their dams twice daily for 30 minutes. Half of the heifers (n=8) were supplemented a starter concentrate (CON) while the other half only had access to their dam’s milk (NOCON). In the post-weaning period (6-15 months), half of the heifers of each pre-weaning feeding treatment received alfalfa hay ad libitum plus concentrates, with a different forage to concentrate ratio (F:C), 67:33 (67F:33C) or 87:13 (87F:13C). Mammary tissue samples were taken by biopsy at weaning at the end of first lactation.

PLATFORM
GPL20768 [BovGene-1_1-st] Bovine Gene 1.1 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

