TITLE
Gene set enrichment analysis and ingenuity pathway analysis of metastatic clear cell renal cell carcinoma cell line

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In recent years, genome wide RNA expression analysis has become a routine tool that offers a great opportunity to study and understand the key role of genes that contribute to carcinogenesis. Various microarray platforms and statistical approaches are implemented to identify genes that might serve as prognostic bio-markers and used for anti-tumor therapies in future. Metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC) is a serious life-threatening disease. There are few treatment options for metastatic RCC patients.  We performed one-color microarray gene expression (4X44K) analysis of metastatic RCC cell line Caki-1 and healthy kidney cell line ASE-5063. 1921 genes were differentially expressed in Caki-1 cell line (1023 up-regulated and 898 down-regulated). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) approach was used to analyse these differentially expressed data from Caki-1.   The objective of this research is to identify complex biological changes that occur during metastatic development using Caki-1 as a model RCC cell line. Our data suggests that there are multiple de-regulated pathways associated with mccRCC including ILK Signaling, Leukocyte Extravasation Signaling, IGF-1 Signaling, CXCR4 Signaling, and PI3K/AKT Signaling. The IPA upstream analysis predicted top transcriptional regulators which are wither activated or inhibited such as ER, TP53, KDM5B, SPDEF, CDKN1A. The GSEA approach was used to further confirm enriched pathway data following IPA analysis.

DESIGN
Comparative gene expression profiling of metastatic clear cell renal cell carcinoma with healthy kidney epithelial cells using GSEA and IPA analysis. Six independent microarrays was performed for two different cell type.

PLATFORM
GPL13497 Agilent-026652 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K v2 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
27279483

