TITLE
FOXF1 inhibits endothelial barrier function in the lung and transcriptionally activates the gene for the S1PR1 receptor

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Multiple signaling pathways, structural proteins and transcription factors are involved in regulation of endothelial barrier function.  The Forkhead protein FOXF1 is a key transcriptional regulator of lung embryonic development, and we use a conditional knockout approach to examine the role of FOXF1 in adult lung homeostasis and lung injury and repair.  Tamoxifen-regulated deletion of both Foxf1 alleles in endothelial cells of adult mice (Pdgfb-iCreER/Foxf1 caused lung inflammation and edema, leading to respiratory insuffency and uniform mortality.  Deletion of a single foxf1 allele was sufficient to increase susceptibility of heterozygous mice to acute lung injury.  FOXF1 abundance was decreased in pulmonary endothelial cells of human patients with acute lung injury.  Gene expression analysis of pulmonary endothelial cells of FOXF1 deletion indicated reduced expression for genes critical for maintance and regulation of adherens junctions.  FOXF1 knockdown in vitro and in vivo disrupted adherens junctions, increased lung endothelial permeability, and the abundance of mRNA and protein for sphingosine 1 phosphate receptor 1 (S1PR1), a key regulator of endothelial barrier function.  Chromatin immunoprecipitation and luciferase reporter assay demonstrated that FOXF1 directly bound to and induced the tanscriptional activity of the S1pr1 promoter.  Pharmacological administratiion of S1P to injured pdgfb-iCreER/Foxf1 mice restored endothelial barrier function, decreased lung edema and improved survival.  Thus, FOXF1 promotes normal lung homeostasis and lung repair, at least in part, by enhancing endothelial barrier function through transcriptional activation of the S1P/S1PR1/ signaling pathway.

DESIGN
RNA was isolated and pooled from the lungs of multiple mice with either the Foxf1 floxed alleles alone or Pdgfb-iCreER Foxf1 floxed mice.

PLATFORM
GPL17021 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
27095594

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
