TITLE
Characterization of gene expression profiling of mouse tissues obtained during the postmortem interval

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Attempts to establish a tissue bank from autopsy samples have led to uncovering of the secrets of many diseases. Here, we examined the length of time that the RNA from postmortem tissues is available for microarray analysis and reported the gene expression profile for up- and down-regulated genes during the postmortem interval (PMI). We extracted RNA from fresh-frozen (FF) and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) brains and livers of three different groups of mice: 1) mice immediately after death, 2) mice that were stored at room temperature for 3 h after death, and 3) mice that were stored at 4°C for 18 h after death, as this storage resembles the human autopsy process in Japan. Based on the microarray analysis, we selected genes that were altered by > 1.3-fold or < 0.77-fold and classified these genes using hierarchical cluster analysis following DAVID (database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery) gene ontology analysis. These studies revealed that cytoskeleton-related genes were enriched in the set of up-regulated genes, while serine protease inhibitors were enriched in the set of down-regulated genes. Interestingly, although the RNA quality was maintained, up-regulated genes were not validated by quantitative PCR, suggesting that these genes may become fragmented or modified by an unknown mechanism.

DESIGN
We extracted RNA from fresh-frozen (FF) brains and livers from mice under three different conditions: 1) mice just after death as a control, 2) mice that were stored at room temperature for 3 h after death, and 3) mice that were stored at 4°C for 18 h after death to resemble the human autopsy process. We also created formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue blocks at the same time using mouse organs obtained under the three conditions described above. We then purified RNA from the FFPE tissue blocks. Furthermore, we performed microarray analysis to examine changes in the gene expression profiles during the postmortem interval in FF samples and to compare ene expression profiles between FF and FFPE samples at three different postmortem times as described for the FF samples.

PLATFORM
GPL11180 [HT_MG-430_PM] Affymetrix HT MG-430 PM Array Plate

CITATIONS
27185020

