TITLE
Aberrant methylation-mediated silencing of microRNAs contributes to HPV-induced anchorage independence [methylation-Illumina]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Cervical cancer and a subset of anogenital and head-and-neck carcinomas are caused by persistent infection with high-risk types of the human papillomavirus (hrHPV). Early stages of hrHPV-induced carcinogenesis can be faithfully mimicked in vitro. A major hallmark of hrHPV-transformed cells is their ability to grow anchorage independently, an oncogenic trait known to depend on inactivation of tumour suppressor genes. This study used an in vitro model of hrHPV-induced transformation to delineate in a longitudinal manner to what extent DNA methylation-mediated silencing of tumour suppressive microRNAs (miRNAs) contributed to hrHPV-induced anchorage independence.  Genome-wide miRNA expression profiles were yielded from anchorage dependent (n=11) and independent passages (n=19) of 4 hrHPV-immortalised keratinocyte cell lines with and without demethylating treatment (DAC). Unsupervised clustering analysis showed that overall miRNA expression patterns discriminated between anchorage dependent and independent cells. Ten miRNA genes potentially silenced by methylation were selected and validated by bisulfite sequencing and methylation-specific PCR. Hsa-mir-129-2, -137, -935, -3663, -3665, and -4281 showed increased methylation in both HPV-transformed keratinocytes and cervical cancer cell lines compared to primary keratinocytes. Mature miRNAs derived from hsa-mir-129-2, -137, -3663, and -3665 decreased anchorage independence in cervical cancer cell lines. Finally, significantly increased methylation of hsa-mir-129-2, -935, -3663, -3665, and -4281 was observed in cervical (pre)cancerous lesions, underlining the clinical relevance of our findings.    In conclusion, methylation-mediated silencing of tumour suppressive miRNAs contributes to the acquisition of anchorage independence, supporting the importance of miRNAs during early stages of carcinogenesis and underlining their potential as both disease markers and therapeutic targets.

DESIGN
Anchorage independent passages of 4 independent HPV-transformed keratinocyte cell lines (FK16A and FK16B containing HPV16 and FK18A and FK18B containing HPV18) were analysed by Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. In addition, primary human foreskin keratinocytes of 2 donors without HPV were included as normal controls.

