TITLE
Evaluation of Genetic Variation Contributing to Differences in Gene Expression between Populations

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Gene expression is a complex quantitative trait partially regulated by genetic variation in DNA sequence. Population differences in gene expression could contribute to some of the observed differences in susceptibility to common diseases and responses to drug treatments. We characterize gene expression in the full set of HapMap lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from individuals of European and African ancestry for 9,156 transcript clusters (gene-level) evaluated using the Affymetrix GeneChip® Human Exon 1.0 ST Array. Gene expression was found to differ significantly between these samples for 383 transcript clusters. Biological processes including ribosome biogenesis and antimicrobial humoral response were found to be enriched in these differential genes, suggesting their possible roles in contributing to the population differences at a higher level than mRNA expression and the population differences in response to environmental information. Genome-wide association studies for local or distant genetic variants that correlate with the differentially expressed genes enabled identification of significant associations with one or more single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), consistent with the hypothesis that genetic factors and not simply population identity or other characteristics (age of cell lines, length of culture etc.) contribute to differences in gene expression in these samples. Our results provided a comprehensive view of the genes differentially expressed between populations and the enriched biological processes involved in these genes. We also provided an evaluation of the contribution of genetic variation and non-genetic factors to the population differences in gene expression. Keywords: exon array

DESIGN
Gene expression on 176 HapMap cell lines.

PLATFORM
GPL5175 [HuEx-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
18313023 , 19925429 , 19164090 , 18439551

