TITLE
Interference with ethylene perception at receptor level sheds light on auxin and transcriptional circuits associated with climacteric ripening of apple fruit (Malus x domestica Borkh.)

ORGANISM
Malus domestica

SUMMARY
Apple (Malus x domestica Borkh.) is a model fruit species to study the metabolic changes occurring at the onset of ripening as well the physiological mechanism governed by the hormone ethylene. In this survey, to dissect the climacteric interplay in apple, a multidisciplinary approach was employed. To this end, a comprehensive analysis of gene expression together with the investigation of several physiological entities (texture, volatilome and polyphenolic compounds) was carried out throughout fruit development and ripening. The transcriptomic profiling was conducted with two microarray platforms, a custom array dedicated to fruit ripening pathways (iRIPE) and a whole genome array specifically enriched of ripening related genes for apple (WGAA). The transcriptomic and phenotypic changes following the application of 1-methylcyclopropene (1-MCP), an ethylene inhibitor, were also highlighted. The suppression of ethylene modified and delayed the ethylene receptors turnover, leading to important modifications in the overall fruit physiology. The integrative comparative network analysis showed both negative and positive correlations between ripening related transcripts and accumulation of specific metabolites or texture components. The ripening distortion caused by the inhibition of the ethylene perception besides affecting the ethylene and texture control, stimulated the de-repression of auxin related genes, transcription factors and photosynthethic genes. In the end, the comprehensive repertoire of results obtained here step forwards in the elucidation of the multi-layered control of ethylene, hypothesizing a possible hormonal cross-talk coupled with a transcriptional regulation.

DESIGN
48 samples analyzed; 8 stages have been identified over the fruit development and ripening (from flower to post harvest ripening) of apple fruit belonging to two apple cultivars (Golden Delicious and Granny Smith), ending with 16 samples (3 replacates for each sample)

PLATFORM
GPL21529 Combimatrix Apple iRIPE array [condensed MDP_ID version]

CITATIONS
27531564

