TITLE
Agonistic targeting of TLR1/TLR2 forces acute myeloid leukemia cells into differentiation

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a fatal disease that is propagated by immature leukemia cells. In search for candidate therapeutic targets in AML, we here identified Toll-like receptor 1 (TLR1) as upregulated in primitive AML cells relative to corresponding normal bone marrow cells. We explored therapeutic targeting of TLR1 in a murine AML model. Stimulating primitive leukemic cells with Pam3CSK4, a Tlr1/Tlr2 agonist, resulted in an increase in actively cycling cells and cell expansion. Morphologic analysis and enhanced CD11b expression indicated rapid myeloid differentiation of the cells. Moreover, Pam3CSK4 strongly suppressed their leukemia-initiating capacity. In contrast, ex vivo Pam3CSK4-stimulation of normal hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells only mildly suppressed their long-term repopulating ability in competitive transplants. In human leukemia, Pam3CSK4-stimulation of MLL-AF9-transformed cord blood cells pushed them into differentiation and eradicated their colony-forming capacity accompanied by AKT and NFκB activation. In AML patient samples, Pam3CSK4 caused cell differentiation in a manner that correlated with the level of TLR1 expression. In summary, these findings demonstrate that TLR1 is upregulated in primitive AML cells and that agonistic targeting of the TLR1/TLR2 complex forces AML cells into differentiation, revealing a new putative strategy for therapeutically differentiating AML cells. Pam3CSK4 (Invivogen, San Diego, CA, USA) was resuspended in endotoxin free water and stored at -20 °C. Mouse MLL-AF9 leukemia cells were provided by Dr. Benjamin Ebert (Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston MA, USA). The murine leukemia cells were cultured in SFEM (StemCell Tech) supplemented with 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37 °C with 5% CO2.

DESIGN
Mouse MLL-AF9 leukemia cells were grown in 10 ng/mL SCF with or without Pam3CSK4 for 3 hours.

