TITLE
Embryonic atrazine exposure alters zebrafish and human miRNAs associated with angiogenesis, cancer, and neurodevelopment

ORGANISM
Danio rerio

SUMMARY
The study of epigenetic mechanisms of gene regulation and the role of these mechanisms in developmental reprogramming of the genome and disease susceptibility has increased in recent years. Molecular epigenetic mechanisms regulating gene expression include DNA methylation, histone modifications, and small non-coding RNAs (e.g., microRNAs). MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short, single-stranded RNA that regulate post-transcriptional control of the translation of mRNA. The importance of these epigenetic regulators in controlling developmental processes is becoming clear. However, to date, few studies have investigated the role of miRNAs in toxicological responses limiting knowledge of these critical regulators in mechanisms of toxicity. Atrazine is a herbicide commonly used throughout the Midwestern United States and other areas of the globe for control of weeds in agricultural crops. In certain areas of the United States, atrazine frequently contaminates potable water supplies above the maximum contaminant level of 3 parts per billion (ppb; mg/L) as set by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) and is a suspected endocrine disrupting chemical. Studies have begun to investigate the genetic mechanisms of atrazine toxicity; however, studies investigating epigenetic mechanisms are limited. Here we report that expression of both zebrafish and human miRNAs are significantly altered in response to a developmental atrazine exposure of 0.3, 3, or 30 ppb from 1-72 hours post fertilization (hpf). Altered miRNAs are known to play a role in angiogenesis, cancer, or neuronal development, differentiation, and maturation. Targeted analysis of altered human miRNAs with genes previously identified to be altered by atrazine exposure revealed several targets linked to cell cycle and cell signaling. Further analysis of hsa-miRNA-126-3p which had altered expression in all three atrazine treatments at 72 hpf revealed alterations also occurred at 60 hpf in the 30 ppb treatment group. Results from this study indicate miRNA deregulation in zebrafish and human miRNAs following an embryonic atrazine exposure in zebrafish.

DESIGN
We treated zebrafish embryos from approximately 1 hour post fertilization through 72 hours post fertilization (embryogenesis) to 0, 0.3, 3, or 30 parts per billion (ppb) atrazine. Following the 72 hour exposure period, total RNA was extracted and a miRNA microarray was completed.

PLATFORM
GPL21545 Agilent-040157 Zebrafish_Human miRNA v18 [miRNA_ID version]

CITATIONS
27046698

