TITLE
Molecular profiling of tumor progression in NSCLC

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
To identify genes associated with lung cancer progression, we examined gene expression profiles of tumor cells from 20 patients with primary, untreated non-small cell lung cancer (10 adenocarcinomas (AC) and 10 squamous cell carcinomas (SCC)) in comparison to lung tissue of 23 patients with stage IIIB or stage IV non-small cell lung cancer (15 AC and 8 SCC). Bronchoscopical biopsies from patient with recurrent lung tumor were taken after initial treatment. Cancer cells were isolated using laser capture microdissection in order to obtain pure samples of tumor cells. For expression analysis, microarrays covering 8793 defined genes (Human HG Focus Array, Affymetrix) were used. Array data were normalized and analysed for significant differences using variance stabilizing transformation (VSN) and significance analysis of microarrays (SAM), respectively. Genes were considered to be up- or down-regulated when the ratio between primary and recurrent tumor samples were at least 1.5-fold differentially expressed with an estimated false discovery rate: < 5%. Based on differentially expressed genes, primary cancer samples could be separated from recurrent tumor samples. We identified 115 and 124 significantly regulates genes in AC and SCC, respectively. For example, in recurrent AC we found increased expression of genes related to the wingless (FZD6, RYK, MYC) and calcium (CALM1, ATB2B1, S100A2) signalling pathways which might play a role in metastasis of tumor cells. Other differentially expressed genes were related to cell cycle (CCND1, CDK2), transcription factors (TTF1, TAF2, YY1), nuclear mRNA splicing and mRNA processing (SFRS1, HNRPL), protein-nucleus import (NUTF2, KPNB1, NUP50) and chromatin modification (HIST1H4C, SMARCC1). In SCC, we found an increased expression of CTNNB1, an important mediator in wingless signalling pathway. Among the down-regulated genes in SCC, the utmost fraction belonged to genes coding for ubiquitin mediated proteolysis (UCHL1, PSMA3, COPS6) and ribosomal proteins (RPS26, RPL7A, RPS15). Other down regulated genes were related to transcription factors (TCEA2, TAF10), nuclear mRNA splicing and mRNA processing (SNRPD2, HNRPM). In conclusion, a distinct pattern of gene expression is found during the progression from primary carcinoma to recurrent NSCLC. Our microarray-based expression profiling revealed interesting novel candidate genes and pathways that may contribute to lung cancer progression. Keywords: Lung cancer, NSCLC, gene expression, progression, Wnt signalling pathway

DESIGN
- 20 patients with primary, untreated non-small cell lung cancer (10adenocarcinomas (AC) and 10 squamous cell carcinomas (SCC)) in comparison to lung tissue of 23 patients with stage IIIB or stage IV non-small cell lung cancer (15 AC and 8 SCC) - Human HG Focus Array, Affymetrix) were used - Array data were normalized and analysed for significant differences using variance stabilizing transformation (VSN) and significance analysis of microarrays (SAM) - Genes were considered to be up- or down-regulated when the ratio between primary and recurrent tumor samples were at least 1.5-fold differentially expressed with an estimated false discovery rate: < 5%

PLATFORM
GPL201 [HG-Focus] Affymetrix Human HG-Focus Target Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

