TITLE
Searching genes responsible for developmental origins of health and disease (DOHaD) by comparing adult and fetal mouse undernutrition models

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
A large number of rodent studies have supported the developmental origins of health and disease (DOHaD) hypothesis that interauterine undernutrition (IU) is a risk factor for non-communicable diseases. The effect of IU is considered to be induced thorough epigenetic programming in the fetal tissues. We have recently carried out global transcriptome expression and promoter DNA methylation analyses on the fetal mouse liver following maternal 50% food restriction (FR) during late gestation, and reported a list of fetal liver genes that were transcriptionally or epigenetically regulated by IU (Ogawa et al., 2014, Congenital Anomalies). We have already reported the genes that were regulated oppositely between maternal and fetal livers (Ogawa et al., 2014, Congenital Anomalies). Here, we considered that the fetal liver is a hematopoietic organ, and exposed nine-week-old male mice (C57BL/6J from Japan SLC, Hamamatsu, Japan; n=8 / group) to 50% FR (chow; CE-2, CLEA, Tokyo Japan) for two weeks and carried out global gene expression analysis on the whole blood by a method reported previously (Ogawa et al., 2014, Congenital Anomalies).

DESIGN
Male C57BL/6J mice at 9 weeks (Japan SLC, Hamamatsu, Japan ; n=8 / group) were exposed to 50% FR (chow; CE-2, CLEA, Tokyo Japan) for 2 weeks. After 2 weeks, the mice were anesthetized with somunopentyl®(Kyoritsu eiyaku, Tokyo) at a dose of 0.5 mL/kg, and blood was taken from the right ventricle of the heart. Blood samples were immediately immersed in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. All animal care and experimental procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Showa University, and caried out at animal facilities in Showa University. DNA Microarray analysis was carried out on 3 pools, respectively. Pool 1 included samples from animal No. 1-8 in each group (control and 50% FR). Pool 2 included samples from animal No. 1-4 in each group. Pool 3 included samples from animal No. 5-8 in each group.

PLATFORM
GPL4134 Agilent-014868 Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K G4122F (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

