TITLE
fibroblasts and iPS cells from patients with insulin receptor mutations

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Insulin resistance is central to diabetes and metabolic syndrome. To define the consequences of genetic insulin resistance distinct from those secondary to cellular differentiation or in vivo regulation, we generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from individuals with insulin receptor mutations and age-appropriate control subjects and studied insulin signaling and gene expression compared with the fibroblasts from which they were derived. iPSCs from patients with genetic insulin resistance exhibited altered insulin signaling, paralleling that seen in the original fibroblasts. Insulin-stimulated expression of immediate early genes and proliferation were also potently reduced in insulin resistant iPSCs. Global gene expression analysis revealed marked differences in both insulin-resistant iPSCs and corresponding fibroblasts compared with control iPSCs and fibroblasts. Patterns of gene expression in patients with genetic insulin resistance were particularly distinct in the two cell types, indicating dependence on not only receptor activity but also the cellular context of the mutant insulin receptor. Thus, iPSCs provide a novel approach to define effects of genetically determined insulin resistance. This study demonstrates that effects of insulin resistance on gene expression are modified by cellular context and differentiation state. Moreover, altered insulin receptor signaling and insulin resistance can modify proliferation and function of pluripotent stem cell populations. To investigate the impact of genetic insulin resistance on transcriptional regulation in iPSCs, we analyzed global gene expression using microarrays in both fibroblasts and iPSCs.

DESIGN
Human skin fibroblasts were obtained from six subjects with insulin receptor mutations and five healthy controls. iPS cells were then generated from these fibroblasts. RNA was extracted and hybridized on Affymetrix microarrays to determine differences in gene expression as a result of cell type and genotype

