TITLE
Hd3a, RFT1 and Ehd1 integrate photoperiodic and drought stress signals to delay the floral transition in rice

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa

SUMMARY
Plants show a high degree of developmental plasticity in response to external cues, including day length and environmental stress. Water scarcity in particular can interfere with photoperiodic flowering, resulting in the acceleration of the switch to reproductive growth in several species, a process called drought escape. However, other strategies are possible and drought stress can also delay flowering, albeit the underlying mechanisms have never been addressed at the molecular level. We investigated these interactions in rice, a short day species in which drought stress delays flowering. A protocol that allows the synchronization of drought with the floral transition was set up to profile the transcriptome of leaves subjected to stress under distinct photoperiods. We identified clusters of genes that responded to drought differently depending on day length. Exposure to drought stress under floral-inductive photoperiods strongly reduced transcription of EARLY HEADING DATE 1 (Ehd1), HEADING DATE 3a (Hd3a) and RICE FLOWERING LOCUS T 1 (RFT1), primary integrators of day length signals, providing a molecular connection between stress and the photoperiodic pathway. However, phenotypic and transcriptional analyses suggested that OsGIGANTEA (OsGI) does not integrate drought and photoperiodic signals as in Arabidopsis, highlighting molecular differences between between long and short day model species.

DESIGN
In this study, we explored the effects of drought stress applied to rice plants grown under specific photoperiods and during floral commitment, when plants switch from vegetative to reproductive growth. It is a 2x2 factorial design with the four conditions: 1) normal water regime plants in long day, 2) normal water regime plants in short day, 3) plants under 13 days of drought stress in long day, 4) plants under 13 days of drought stress in short day.

PLATFORM
GPL13160 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Oryza sativa)

CITATIONS
27111837

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
