TITLE
cDNA microarray analysis of gene expression in blood mononuclear cells of Yorkshire pigs with SLA-DRB1 defined genotypes

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
The major histocompatibility complex (SLA in pigs) encodes molecules for self-nonself discrimination, constitute a major transplantation barrier and is associated with a variety of diseases. Pigs with defined SLA genotypes are a resource for the study of immune response, disease resistance and production traits, as well as an important animal model for transplantation research. The aim of the present study was to explore the influence of defined SLA genotypes on gene expression patterns of immune-related genes in blood mononuclear cells (BMCs). Using a loop design, heterologous cDNA microarray hybridizations were performed to compare Yorkshire pigs representing three defined SLA-DRB1 genotypes (including a potentially new allele). Total RNA was treated with Dnase I treated and amplified. The amplified RNA was reverse transcribed using random primers and incorporating 5-(3-aminoallyl)-dUTP for post-synthesis labelling of the cDNA with the appropriate fluor dyes. Hybridization was performed on a bovine immune-endocrine in-house cDNA microarray printed on glass slides. Microarray fold-change analysis revealed that animals carrying confirmed SLA alleles (SLA-DRB1*070701 and SLA-DRB1*050502) showed consistent differences in gene expression when compared to the two other groups. On the other hand, the group carrying a potentially new allele showed differences that varied depending on the group it was being compared to. Genes that were identified as differentially expressed include macrophage inflammatory protein 1, interleukin 1, toll-like receptor 2 and caspase 1. A better understanding of SLA gene activity can facilitate the definition of new strategies to control animal health and optimize animal production. Keywords: SLA-defined genotype comparative genomic cDNA microarray hybridizations

DESIGN
Three groups (n = 2) were established, each representing a defined SLA-DRB1 genotype. A loop design was used to reciprocally compare the three groups. A total of 6 comparisons were performed with one animal per group being compared to two different animals from the two other groups. Each array was replicated twice with reciprocal labeling (dye-swap).

PLATFORM
GPL5172 UofG_Mallard_Bovine_Immune-endocrine_v2.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

