TITLE
Rice (Oryza sativa L. Koshihikari) mature dry seed transcriptomes under a record hot summer of 2010 in the Kanto region of Japan using DNA microarray and MapMan analyses approach

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa

SUMMARY
Higher temperature conditions during the final stages of rice seed development (seed filling and maturation) are known to cause damage to both rice yield and rice kernel quality. Japan, especially western and central parts, has seen record high temperatures in the last decade, and the rice kernel quality has decreased; specifically a reduction the first-grade of rice has been seen. In this study, we specifically looked at the harvested rice in a town of the central Kanto-plains (Japan) during the year 2010, which saw day-time temperatures go above the critical limits ranging from 34 to 38C at the final stages of seed development and maturity to investigate high-temperature effects in the actual field condition. Three sets of dry mature rice seeds (commercial) were obtained Japan Agriculture (JA Zen-Noh) branch in Ami-town of Ibaraki prefecture in September 2010, as grade 1 (labeled as Y1), grade 2 (labeled as Y2), and grade 3 (out-of-grade, labeled as Y3). The research objective was to examine in particular alterations in gene expressions genome-wide in grade 2 (Y2) and grade 3 (Y3) seeds over the grade 1 (Y1) following the high-temperature spike using a high-throughput omic-approach DNA microarray (Agilent 4 x 44K rice oligo DNA chip) in conjunction with MapMan bioinformatics analysis. Rice seed quality analysis revealed, as expected, low quality in Y3 > Y2 over Y1, in taste, amylose, protein and fatty acid degree, but not in water content. Transcriptome profiling data revealed 124 and 373 up-regulated and 106 and 129 down-regulated genes in Y2 and Y3, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis of differentially expressed genes revealed changes in function of genes related to metabolism, including starch metabolism (e.g., alpha amylase), defense/stress response, fatty acid biosynthesis and hormones. This research provides for the first time the seed transcriptome profile for the classified low grades (2 and out-of-grade) of rice under an actual stressed environmental condition of high temperature.

DESIGN
Comparison between O. sativa L. japonica cv. Koshihikari grown in a commercial field in Ami town,Kanto plains of Ibaraki prefecture, Japan. Seeds of grade 1, 2 and 3 (out-of-grade) labeled as Y1, 2, and 3, respectively, were pooled (12 each) and ground in liquid nitrogen for total RNA extraction followed by DNA microarray analysis using the dye-swap approach (Agilent) pooled).

PLATFORM
GPL7252 Custom GER rice oligoarray

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

