TITLE
Posttranscriptional Control of Flocculation, Surface Adhesion and Invasive Growth by the Pumilio gene pfr1+ in Schizosaccharomyces pombe

ORGANISM
Schizosaccharomyces pombe

SUMMARY
The regulation of flocculation, surface adhesion and invasive growth in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe has focused primarily at the transcriptional level, but little is known with regards to posttranscriptional control. Here, we identified the Pumilio protein Pfr1 as a novel posttranscriptional regulator of these processes. Deletion of pfr1+ prevented flocculation, surface adhesion and invasive growth under inducing conditions, while overexpression of pfr1+ was sufficient to trigger flocculation. The flocculent phenotype of pfr1+ overexpression was dependent on the presence of the Gsf2 flocculin, but not on the Mbx2, Cbf12 and Adn3 transcription factors. In addition, we used RNA immunoprecipitation and expression microarrays to identify pvg1+ and SPBPB7E8.01, which encode a galactose pyruvyltransferase and glycophosphatidylinositol membrane protein, respectively, as putative mRNA targets potentially degraded by Pfr1. The mRNAs of these genes were upregulated and downregulated in the pfr1 deletion and overexpression strains, respectively, and contained putative binding sites in the 3’-untranslated region. We also discovered that ccr4+ and ste13+, which encode components of the mRNA decay machinery, were required for these processes, but did not suppress the pfr1+ overexpression flocculent phenotype when deleted. This data suggest that these processes in S. pombe involve multiple posttranscriptional-regulatory pathways of which one requires Pfr1.

DESIGN
We generated 2 overexpression microarrays with dye swap that were biological replicates, 2 deletion microarrys with dye swap. Mutants samples were compared to empty vector control or wild type. 1 RIP-chip array was generated with IP rna compared to total RNA from the sample.

PLATFORM
GPL16187 Agilent-019701 Schizosaccharomyces pombe 8x15 expression array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

