TITLE
Striatal gene expression data from 3- and 18-month-old Q92 mice and control mice.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Achieving a mechanistic understanding of disease and initiating preclinical therapeutic trials necessitate the study of huntingtin toxicity and its remedy in model systems. To allow the engagement of appropriate experimental paradigms, Huntington’s disease (HD) models need to be validated in terms of how they recapitulate a particular aspect of human disease. In order to examine transcriptome-related effects of mutant huntingtin, we compared striatal mRNA profiles from seven genetic mouse models of disease to that of postmortem human HD caudate using microarray analysis. Transgenic models expressing short N-terminal fragments of mutant huntingtin (R6/1 and R6/2 mice) exhibited the most rapid effects on gene expression, consistent with previous studies. Although changes in the brains of knock-in models of HD took longer to appear, 15-month and 22-month CHL2Q150/Q150, 18-month HdhQ92/Q92 and 2-year-old YAC128 animals also exhibited significant HD-like mRNA signatures. When the affected genes were compared across models, a robust concordance was observed. Importantly, changes concordant across multiple lines mice were also in excellent agreement with the mRNA changes seen in human HD caudate. Although it was expected that the expression of full-length huntingtin transprotein might result in unique gene expression changes compared to those caused by expression of an N-terminal huntingtin fragment, no discernable differences between full-length and fragment models were detected. There was, however, an overall concordance between transcriptomic signature and disease stage. We thus conclude that the transcriptional changes of HD can be modelled in several available lines of transgenic mice, comprising lines expressing both N-terminal and full-length mutant huntingtin proteins. The combined analysis of mouse and human HD transcriptomes provides an important chronology of mutant huntingtin's gene expression effects. Keywords: genetic modification

DESIGN
Striatal samples from 6 Q92 mutant mice (3 3-month-old and 3 18-month-old) and 6 age-matched wild-type mice.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
17519223

