TITLE
Transcriptional profiles of stomach organoids from human embryonic stem cells.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Gastric ulcer, which affect many of patients and is deeply related with gastric cancer, is caused by chronic gastric acid stimulation. Stomach fundus, the main body of stomach, is a major source of gastric acid and peptidase for food digestion. Recapturing the main body of stomach requires mainly 3 functionally differentiated cells; parietal (oxyntic) cells, chief (zymogenic) cells, and surface mucous foveolar (pit) cells. We have previously shown the induction of stomach tissue with functional secreting activities by directed differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells (ES cells) to stomach primordium with both gut epithelium and splanchnic mesoderm. However, generating human stomach with fundus and such functions has been elucidated and a long-desired goal. Here, we describe the method for establishing human embryonic stem cell-derived stomach organoids with fundus gland structure. Along with mouse stomach development and de novo stomach generation from mouse ES cells in vitro, we observed gut-like structure formation from human embryonic stem cells by induction of both endoderm and mesoderm. These human embryonic gut could differentiate into stomach primordium by growth factor stimulation as well as stomach development, and form stomach tissue in three-dimensional organoid culture. Furthermore, these stomach organoids contain fundus-like gland with parietal cells and chief cells, some of secreting activities, and is transcriptionally close to human stomach. Human functional stomach derived from embryonic stem cells represent powerful tools for analying human stomach development, and gastric ulcer related disease including gastric tumorgenesis.

DESIGN
We generated arrays from stomach organoids derived from human embryonic stem cells.

PLATFORM
GPL14550 Agilent-028004 SurePrint G3 Human GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name Version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

