TITLE
Wistar rats with iron deficiency and repletion and Belgrade rats normally fed or fed iron in drinking water: villus

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Gene expression along the crypt-villus (C-V) axis was analyzed using cryostat sectioning to isolate fractions representing the crypts (bottom) and villus tops (top). These fractions were used for analyzing gene expression in iron replete Wistar rats (++), iron deficient Wistar rats (low iron), and in iron deficient Wistar rats fed iron for 3 and 6 days (iron-fed).  Differences were observed between the crypts and villus tops in the expression of genes associated with Wnt and BNP signaling, cell proliferation and apoptosis, lipid and iron transport and metabolism.  Gene expression in villus crypts and tops was also compared between Wistar and Belgrade rats (bb) and Belgrade rats fed iron (iron-fed) particularly as related to iron absorption and metabolism to define the affects of the mutation in DMT1 in the Belgrade rat on the expression of genes related to iron absorption and metabolism and the response to iron feeding. Keywords: iron stress response

DESIGN
A colony of Wistar strain rats (++) and Belgrade (bb) rats on a Wistar background maintained in our animal quarters was used for this study.  Twelve one-month old ++ rats were separated into 3 groups of four rats each. Group 1 rats (samples 1-8) were fed a normal diet and served as control animals.  Group 2 (samples 9-16) and Group 3 rats (samples 17-22) were fed a low iron diet and bled 2-3 ml every three days for 4 weeks and served as iron deficient rats (low-iron). Group 3 rats, of which one rat died during anesthesia while undergoing phlebotomy, were fed iron supplementation in drinking water (50 µM Ferric ammonium citrate) for the three days before sacrifice (iron-fed).  Rats were fasted overnight, killed by injection of pentobarbital sodium and a 1-cm duodenal segment 1 cm distal from the pylorus was cryostat sectioned at the right angle to the crypt-villus axis and the sections representing the top one-third of villus (top) and the bottom one-third of the villus were pooled for RNA isolation. For the study of Belgrade rats, eleven bb rats were divided into 3 groups with the 4 rats in Group 1 (samples 23-30) maintained on a normal diet, the 4 rats in Group 2 (samples 31-38) fed iron for 3 days prior to sacrifice, and the 3 rats in Group 3 (samples 39-44) fed iron for 6 days prior to sacrifice.  All procedures for the bb rats were the same as described above for the ++ rats.  An additional ++ rat (samples 45-46) was similarly analyzed in a separate experiment.

PLATFORM
GPL1355 [Rat230_2] Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
21436314

