TITLE
Syntrophic interactions within the multi-species exoelectrogenic biofilm community in bio-electrochemical systems

ORGANISM
Geobacter metallireducens ; Geobacter sulfurreducens ; Shewanella oneidensis

SUMMARY
Anode-associated multi-species exoelectrogenic biofilms are essential to the function of bioelectrochemical systems (BESs). The investigation of electrode-associated biofilms is critical to advance understanding of the function of individual members within communities that thrive using an electrode as the terminal electron acceptor. This study focusses on the analysis of a model biofilm community consisting of Shewanella oneidensis, Geobacter sulfurreducens and Geobacter metallireducens. The conducted experiments revealed that the organisms can build a stable biofilm on an electrode surface that is rather resilient to changes in the redox potential of the anode surface. The community operated at maximum electron transfer rates with electrode potentials of 0.04 V versus normal hydrogen electrode. Current densities decreased gradually with lower potentials and reached half-maximal values at -0.08 V. A positive interaction of the individual strains could be observed in our experiments. At least S. oneidensis and G. sulfurreducens show an upregulation of their central metabolism as a response to cultivation under mixed-species conditions. Interestingly, G. sulfurreducens was detected in the planktonic phase of the bioelectrochemical reactors only in mixed-culture experiments but not when it was grown in the absence of the other two organisms. It is possible that G. sulfurreducens cells used flavins which were released by S. oneidensis cells as electron shuttles. This would allow the organism to broaden its environmental niche. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study describing the dynamics of biofilm formation of a model exoelectrogenic community, the resilience of the biofilm, and the molecular responses towards mixed-species conditions.

DESIGN
RNA-seq of three species growing as biofilms on electrodes. Triplicate samples were analyzed for each species in pure culture and a mixed culture of all three species. Samples were taken from the biofilms and the plantonic phase, independently.

PLATFORM
GPL21675 Illumina HiSeq 1500 (Geobacter sulfurreducens) GPL21676 Illumina HiSeq 1500 (Shewanella oneidensis) GPL21677 Illumina HiSeq 1500 (Geobacter metallireducens) GPL21678 Illumina HiSeq 1500 (Geobacter metallireducens; Geobacter sulfurreducens; Shewanella oneidensis)

CITATIONS
28087529

