TITLE
Metabolomic profiling of Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens-induced root nodules reveals both host plant-specific and developmental signatures

ORGANISM
Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens

SUMMARY
Metabolomics and transcriptomics of Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens-induced root nodules Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens is a nitrogen-fixing endosymbiont, which can grow inside root-nodule cells of the agriculturally important soybean and other host plants. Our previous studies described B. diazoefficiens host-specific global expression changes occurring during legume infection at the transcript and protein level. In order to further characterize nodule metabolism, we here determine by flow injection -time of flight mass spectrometry analysis the metabolome of i) nodules and roots from four different B. diazoefficiens host plants, ii) soybean nodules harvested at different time points during nodule development, and iii) soybean nodules infected by two strains mutated in key genes for nitrogen fixation, respectively. Ribose (soybean), tartaric acid (mungbean), hydroxybutanoyloxybutanoate (siratro) and catechol (cowpea) were among the metabolites found to be specifically elevated in one of the respective host plants. While the level of C4-dicarboxylic acids decreased during soybean nodule development, we observed an accumulation of trehalose-phosphate at 21 days post infection (dpi). Moreover, nodules from non-nitrogen-fixing bacteroids (nifA and nifH mutants) showed specific metabolic alterations; these were also supported by transcriptomics data that was generated for the two mutant strains and were helpful to separate for some examples the respective bacterial and plant contributions to the metabolic profile. The alterations included signs of nitrogen limitation in both mutants, and an increased level of a phytoalexin in nodules induced by the nifA mutant, suggesting that the tissue of these nodules exhibits defense and stress reactions.

DESIGN
Metabolomics by flow injection -time of flight mass spectrometry analysis of i) nodules and roots from four different B. diazoefficiens host plants, ii) soybean nodules obtained from different time points in nodule development, and iii) soybean nodules infected by two strains mutated in key genes for nitrogen fixation, respectively. Transcriptomics of nodules induced by the two strains mutated in key genes for nitrogen fixation . For comparison with the two mutant strain data, the existing wild-type nodules data (GSM210242- GSM210245) were used "

PLATFORM
GPL3401 Affymetrix custom Bradyrhizobium japonicum strain USDA 110 19K array

CITATIONS
27240350

