TITLE
Transcriptome profiling of septic shock patients reveals distinct hydrocortisone effects

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Septic shock is frequently observed in intensive care units worldwide and associated with a high mortality rate. Glucocorticoid treatment is partially considered beneficial for resolution of inflammatory responses, but turned out to be effective in a subset of patients only. Current diagnostic approaches like ACTH-stimulation do not provide a reliable indicator for responsiveness and consequently lead to uncertainty. Here, we present a prospective study performed with a well-defined and balanced patient cohort suffering from septic shock from the CORTICUS-trial (Sprung et al. 2008), in which we aimed to uncover the biological reasons why patients can exhibit dramatically different outcomes after hydrocortisone treatment. Different individual and time-resolved patterns were found for patients comprising altered monocyte-related, tryptophan- and inflammation-associated features. This was confirmed by a tailored method including individual time-resolved changes and multivariate analyses.

DESIGN
Paired samples of 46 septic shock patients from the CORTICUS-trial (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00147004) treated with either Placebo or Hydrocortisone (Verum) were included. Whole blood from patients was collected in the morning (pre) and 24 hours (post) later. Total cellular RNA from circulating leukocytes was isolated using PaxGene Blood RNA Kit (PreAnalytix) for transcriptome profiling. RNA from blood of patients was extracted and subjected to microarray analysis for comparison of transcriptomic responses in patients. RNA samples of circulating leukocytes covering time points directly after admission (T0) and on the consecutive day (post) were subject to multifactorial microarray data analysis: Differences in dynamics of transcripts were assessed by contrasting individual-resolved changes. Study support by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF; grant FKZ 01EO1002; Center for Sepsis Control and Care) and 03Z2J521 (Meta-ZIK) as well as the patients is gratefully acknowledged.

