TITLE
The SAGA complex in the rice pathogen Fusarium fujikuroi: structure and functional characterization

ORGANISM
Fusarium fujikuroi IMI 58289

SUMMARY
Post-translational modification of histones is a crucial mode of transcriptional regulation in eukaryotes. A well-described acetylation modifier of certain lysine residues is the Spt-Ada-Gcn5 acetyltransferase (SAGA) complex assembled around the histone acetyltransferase Gcn5 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We identified and characterized the SAGA complex in the rice pathogen Fusarium fujikuroi, well-known for producing a large variety of secondary metabolites (SMs). By using a co-immunoprecipitation approach, almost all of the S. cerevisiae SAGA complex components have been identified, except for the ubiquitinating DUBm module and the chromodomain containing Chd1. Deletion of GCN5 led to impaired growth, loss of conidiation and alteration of SM biosynthesis. Furthermore, we show that in F. fujikuroi Gcn5 is essential for the acetylation of several histone 3 lysines, i.e. H3K4, H3K9, H3K18 and H3K27. A genome-wide microarray analysis revealed differential expression of about 30% of the genome with an enrichment of genes involved in primary and secondary metabolism, transport and histone modification. HPLC-based analysis of known SMs revealed significant alterations in the Δgcn5 mutant. While most SM genes were activated by Gcn5 activity, the biosynthesis of the pigment bikaverin was strongly increased upon GCN5 deletion underlining the diverse roles of the SAGA complex in F. fujikuroi. Investigation of whole genome gene expression of the Fusarium fujikuroi wild type IMI58289 and the Δgcn5 mutant under nitrogen starvation and nitrogen sufficient conditions.

DESIGN
In this study we hybridized in total 12 microarrays using total RNA recovered from a wild-type culture of F. fujikuroi IMI58289 and Δgcn5 mutant culture. All cultures were grown in a 6 mM Gln (10%) and a 60 mM Gln ICI liquid medium (100%). For each combination of culture and medium in total three biological replicate were created. Each chip measures the expression level of 14,808 genes from F. fujikuroi IMI58289 with eight 60-mer probes.

PLATFORM
GPL21707 Fusarium fujikuroi annotation version 2 gene expression array [121227_Ffuji_v2_2_BT]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

