TITLE
A gene expression signature of confinement in peripheral blood of red wolves (Canis rufus)

ORGANISM
Canis latrans ; Canis rufus

SUMMARY
Background: The idea of using whole genome microarrays to detect peripheral blood biomarkers for physiological status a fairly new and unexplored method. Identifying biomarkers that can be linked to stress and immune response would be of great importance not only in animal management practices but in humans as well. The main objective of this research was to explore this concept using the North American Red Wolf (Canis rufus) which are exposed to a wide variety of environments from free ranging to confinement. Results: Transcription profiling of peripheral blood samples from 13 red wolf individuals in the Alligator River region of North Carolina revealed a strong signal of differentiation between confined and free-range animals.  482 out of 2,980 transcripts detected on the human Illumina Ref8 oligonucleotide bead arrays were found to differentiate these groups at a false discovery rate of 5 percent.  Over-representation of genes in focal adhesion, insulin signaling, proteasomal, and tryptophan metabolism pathways suggests the activation of proinflammatory and stress responses in confined animals. Conclusions:  Integration of immunological and physiological signals may leave a signature of lifestyle in the patterns of gene expression in the blood and suggest the possible development of biomarkers for disease and normal conditions. Keywords: Stress Response/Disease State

DESIGN
14 whole blood samples were collect from captive and free ranging red wolves. Information pertaining to sex and current holding status was obtained for each individual. In total we had 6 captive wolves (2 females and 4 males), 7 free range wolves (2 females and 5 males) and 1 free range female coyote. Total RNA was extracted from whole blood samples stored in RNAlater at -20C. Total RNA was amplified and biotin labeled using Ambion's Illumina RNA Amplification Kit (#I1755). Each labeled sample was hybridized on 4 independent arrays, giving a total of 56 arrays (4/sample).  Hybridization was done at 42C overnight. Arrays were washed and stained with strepavidin linked Cy3. Arrays were scanned on Illumina's BeadStation Scanner and raw intensity data was extracted using Illumina Beadstudio. Raw intensities were log base 2 transformed and then median center standardized in SAS using the proc stdize.

PLATFORM
GPL2700 Sentrix HumanRef-8 Expression BeadChip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

