TITLE
Comparative transcriptomics reveals the different gene expression pattern related to wilt disease resistance and susceptibility in biodiesel plants of Vernicia

ORGANISM
Vernicia fordii

SUMMARY
Background: Vernicia fordii (Tung oil tree) is a popular tree for biodiesel production in China. Unfortunately, the devastating Fusarium wilt disease caused great losses in production. Its sister species (Vernicia montana) was shown resistant to this pathogen. Vernicia fordii and Vernicia montana are main Vernicia species. V. fordii owns superior oil and agronomic traits, but susceptible to tung wilt disease, while V. nontana is resistant the wilt. However, the plants response mechanism remains largely unknown. Method: To define the divergence of gene expression modules between the resistant and susceptible Vernicia species responding to tung wilt pathogen, we generated comparative transcriptome atlases of two species during the process of infection with the pathogen F. oxysporum by RNA Sequencing in three biological replicates. Results: We describe the de novo assembly of the transcriptome of V. fordii and V. montana, comprising 258,430 and 245,240 non-redundant transcripts with N50 of 1,776 and 2,452 respectively. About 44,310 pair of putatively one-to-one orthologous genes between V. fordii and V. montana transcriptoms were identified. Overall, a high proportion of orthologous genes shared remarkably similar expression mode between Vernicia species. K means clustering indicated 2 cluster appear opposite expression mode. The highly connected gene expression analysis were conducted among genes with significantly differential expression mode, and the result indicated D6PK and LRR-RLK CLAVATA2 were top hub genes and hub genes glycosyltransferase (Gts), GLABRA2, PERK15 and EREBP-like factor were significantly associated with pathologic grades in resistant V. montana. Moreover, the result showed the resistant is a crucial signaling network, where MAPK signaling pathway, Plant-pathogen interaction, Circadian rhythm, Calcium signaling pathway and apoptosis fulfill distinct function. Additionally, dozens of unigenes were validated by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). The study provided insight into the resistance gene expression modules. Conclusion: We first conducted a system analyses of the dynamics of gene expression both in susceptible and resistant Vernicia species with pathogen F. oxysporum infection. The results will serve as the important foundation to further deeply validation the resistance mechanism and breeding of the woody biodiesel plants V. fordii and V. montana.

DESIGN
We generated 24 comparative transcriptome between V. fordii (F) and V. montana (M), consisting of three biological replicates of four different stages for each species infected with pathogen F. oxysporum, including F0, F1, F2, F3, M0, M1, M2, M3

