TITLE
Adaptation of Porphyromonas gingivalis to Streptococcus gordonii observed using time-coursed RNA-Seq

ORGANISM
Porphyromonas gingivalis

SUMMARY
Periodontal diseases are one of the most common human maladies and appear to be caused by the interaction of proximal pathogens such as Porphyromonas gingivalis but only as part of the polymicrobial community known as dental plaque. Streptococcus gordonii is an early colonizing oral organism that binds to oral surfaces and provides adherence for organisms such as P. gingivalis. Together P. gingivalis and S. gordonii form one of the simplest models of potentially pathogenic dental plaque. We used RNA sequencing to monitor the transcriptome of P. gingivalis over time in a biofilm model both in the presence and absence of S. gordonii. Samples were taken at 5, 30, 120, 240, and 360 minutes after shifing from planktonic to sessile conditions and growth media to PBS. When compared to planktonic cells increased transcripts were found for stress, amino acid catabolism, and comeptence and decreased transcripts for DNA replication. The presence of S. gordonii resulted in fewer changes from planktonic cells implying physiological support to Pl gingivalis making the transition from planktonic to sessile easier.

DESIGN
Samples included model biofilms from 5, 30, 120, 240, and 360 minutes after transitioning from planktonic to sessile.  Samples were taken for both P. gingivalis alone and equal cell counts of P. gingivalis and S. gordonii mixed and transitioned to a sessile state. Two or three biological replicates were taken for each time point. Planktonic P. gingivalis cells were measured as a time zero control. The results were compared to the time zero control and P. gingivalis plus S. gordonii samples were compared to P. gingivalis alone samples at each time point.

PLATFORM
GPL21491 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Porphyromonas gingivalis)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
