TITLE
Assessing the mechanism and therapeutic potential of modulators of the human Mediator complex-associated protein kinases

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Mediator-associated kinases CDK8/19 are context-dependent drivers or suppressors of tumorigenesis.  Their inhibition is predicted to have pleiotropic effects, but it is unclear whether this will limit the clinical utility of CDK8/19 inhibitors.  We discovered two series of potent chemical probes with high selectivity for CDK8/19.  Despite pharmacodynamic evidence for robust on-target activity, the compounds exhibited only modest efficacy against human tumor cell line or patient-derived xenografts.  Expression profiling detected altered gene expression consistent with CDK8/19 inhibition, including profiles associated with superenhancer–regulated gene expression.  In a mouse model expressing oncogenic beta-catenin, treatment shifted cells within hyperplastic intestinal crypts from a stem cell to a transit amplifying phenotype.  Finally, in two species, neither test compound was tolerated at therapeutically-relevant exposures.  The complex nature of the toxicity observed with two structurally-differentiated chemical series is consistent with on-target effects posing significant challenges to the further clinical development of CDK8/19 inhibitors.

DESIGN
SW620 colon cancer cells were grown as xenografts in female NCr athymic mice and once established, treated twice daily  with 70 mg/kg of Compound 1 or vehicle. Two and six hours after the final dose tumours were snap frozen. Tumour sample RNA was hybridised against human reference. Compound 1 is from a series of close analogues of a 3,4,5-trisubstituted pyridine series identified from a high-throughput cell-based reporter assay of WNT signalling. It was shown to be a potent and selective inhibitor of the Mediator complex-associated protein kinases CDK8 and CDK19. It is an ATP competitive inhibitor with > 100-fold selectivity over 291 other kinases. X-ray crystallography demonstrates Type 1 binding involving insertion of the CDK8 C-terminus into the ligand-binding site.

PLATFORM
GPL17077 Agilent-039494 SurePrint G3 Human GE v2 8x60K Microarray 039381 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
27935476

