TITLE
mRNA Expression profiles of parental Panc cell lines and Gemcitabine resistance Panc1cell lines

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Gemcitabine (GEM) is a key drug for treating PDAC, and it is commonly used for adjuvant chemotherapy. Although the majority of PDAC is sensitive to GEM at first, GEM cannot control PDAC for very long, suggesting that PDAC develops resistance to GEM after prolonged exposure. No reliable predictors of susceptibility to gemcitabine chemotherapy exist in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. This study assesses gemcitabine resistant PDAC for its specific mRNA expression pattern. Gemcitabine resistant variants of Panc1, a human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line, were established. mRNA screening was investigated by microarray.

DESIGN
GEM-resistant cells were generated by exposure to gradually increasing concentrations of the reagent for 2 months. Parental Panc1cells (Panc1-Pt) were exposed to GEM at an initial concentration of 2 ng/ml. When the cells adapted, the GEM concentration was increased. The final GEM concentration was 30 ng/ml. Limiting the dilution of the established cells allowed the cloning of the GEM-resistant Panc1cells, and the three independent clones (Panc1-GRs: Panc1-GR1, -GR3, and –GR4) were used in the present experiments. Total RNA was isolated from parental Panc1and gemcitabine resistance Panc1 cell lines using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA and Amino Allyl aRNA was synthesis by Amino Allyl MessageAmp II aRNA Amplification Kit (Ambion#1753). CyeDye Coupling and fragmentation were performed as the protocol supplied by TORAY Industries, Inc.. Hybridized for 16 h at 37 C with rotary shake (250 rpm). Hybridization buffer and washing protocol was followed by the protocol supplied by TORAY Industries, Inc.. 3D-Gene Scanner ((Toray Industries Inc., Tokyo, Japan) was used for scanning. Images were quantified using Extraction(Toray Industries Inc., Tokyo, Japan). The raw data of each spot was normalized by substitution with a mean intensity of the background signal determined by all blank spots’ signal intensities of 95% confidence intervals.

PLATFORM
GPL13915 3D-Gene Human Oligo chip 25k V2.1

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

