TITLE
Profile of small interfering RNAs derived from Beet black scorch virus and its associated satellite RNA in Nicotiana benthamiana

ORGANISM
Nicotiana benthamiana

SUMMARY
Co-infection of none-coding satellite RNAs (sat-RNAs) usually inhibits replication and attenuates disease symptoms of helper viruses. Here we find that the sat-RNA of Beet black scorch virus (BBSV) enhances both the accumulation and the systemic infection of its helper virus in the Nicotiana benthamiana (N. benthamiana). Besides, the infection of BBSV is higher efficient in low temperature (18ºC) than room temperature (25ºC), suggesting that BBSV is temperature sensitive. To explore the effect of temperature and sat-RNA on the silencing induced by BBSV, we cloned and sequenced the total small RNAs produced during infection of BBSV alone or with its sat-RNA under different temperature. Our results shows that the size profile of the siRNAs derived from either BBSV or coinfection with sat-RNA are 22 nucleotide (nt), followed by 21-nt reads and other length reads. Notably, more than 80% of the total small RNAs sequenced from plants infected with BBSV alone were BBSV-siRNAs, whereas the abundance of sat-RNA-derived siRNAs were higher than BBSV-siRNAs in the co-infected plants, indicating sat-RNA involved in gene silencing as a surrogacy of BBSV. Interestingly, the 5′ termini of siRNAs derived from BBSV and sat-RNA were dominated by Uridines (U) and Adenines (A), respectively. Consistently, the infection of BBSV alone or with sat-RNA induces high accumulation of Argonaute 1 (AGO1) and AGO2, respectively. Our work reveals the profiles of siRNAs of BBSV and sat-RNA and provides a new clue to investigate the complicated interaction between the helper virus and sat-RNA.

DESIGN
analysis of small RNAs from Nicotiana benthamiana infected by BBSV alone or with its sat-RNA at two temperature conditions in compared with mock-inoculated plant.

PLATFORM
GPL19037 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Nicotiana benthamiana)

CITATIONS
27867378

LIBSTRATS
:NCRNA-SEQ
