TITLE
Affymetrix SNP array data of melanoma cell lines from lymph node metastates

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Melanoma recurrence frequently occurs after a latency period of several years. In vivo studies demonstrated that tumor cells overcoming latency show a T cell-edited phenotype, suggesting a relevant role for CD8+ T cells in maintaining metastatic latency. Here, in a patient model of multiple recurrent lesions, we illustrate the genetic evolution of poorly immunogenic melanoma phenotypes, evolving in the presence of autologous tumor antigen-specific CD8+ T cells. Melanoma cells from two of three late recurrent metastases, developing within a 6-year latency period, lacked HLA class I expression. HLA class I-negative tumor cells became clinically apparent 1.5 and 6 years into stage IV disease. Genome profiling by SNP arrays revealed total T-cell resistance in both metastases originating from a shared chromosome 15q alteration and independently acquired focal B2M gene deletions. A third HLA class I-positive lesion developed in year 3 of stage IV disease. By HLA haplotype loss lesion-derived melanoma cells acquired resistance towards dominant T-cell clonotypes targeting early stage III tumor cells. Early disease melanoma cells showed a dedifferentiated MITFnegative phenotype, recently described to be associated with immunosuppression, in contrast to the MITFhigh phenotype of T cell-edited tumor cells from late metastases. In summary, our study demonstrates that tumor recurrences after long-term latency develop towards T-cell resistance by independent genetic events, suggesting a mechanism of T cell-driven genetic evolution of melanoma as a means to evade immune recognition and tumor immunotherapy. Genetic alterations lead to loss of tumor antigen presentation.

DESIGN
Cell lines were generated from tumor material, differences in T cell recognition were observed and Affymetrix SNP arrays were performed according to the manufacturer's directions on DNA extracted from the cell lines. SNP analysis of different melanoma cell lines obtained from one melanoma patient (4 cell lines from different metastasis of one patient with matching germline DNA).

