TITLE
Rib bone growth

ORGANISM
Cervus elaphus

SUMMARY
Rib bone growth in red deer stags - Abstract: In 'The Bone and Joint Decade' interest is focused on genetic factors causing bone disorders. Osteoporosis, attacking 10% of the population worldwide, is the most common metabolic bone disease, which is mimiced by several ovarectomised or genetically modified 'cascadeur' animal species, but none of them is able to remedy its pathologically porous bone tissue. Regeneration in skeletal elements is the curiosity of our newly investigated osteoporosis animal model, red deer (Cervus elaphus). The cyclic physiological osteoporosis in red deer stag is a consequence of the annual antler cycle. This phenomenon raises the possibility to explore new genes involved in regulating bone mineral density (BMD) and recovery of bone resorption on the basis of comparative genomics between deer and human. Here we compared the gene expression activities of osteoporotic and regenerating flying rib bone samples versus late autumn dwell control in red deer by heterologous microarray hybridization. Identified genes were tested on human femoral bone tissue from postmenopausal osteoporotic and non-osteoporotic patients. Expression data were evaluated by Principal Components Analysis and Discriminant Analysis. Keywords: Gene Expression experiment

DESIGN
Approximately 2-3 g flying rib bone pieces in the entire cross section of bony rib were surgically removed from 3 anaesthetized [SBH-Ketamine (2.5 mg/kg live weight) combined with Xylazine (0.2 mg/kg live weight) i.m. injection] 6, 7 and 8 year old Cervus elaphus stags. (Cast antler pairs weighed 7-8 kg for each animal.) Removed rib pieces were extensively washed in PBS for eliminating blood and marrow contamination, than immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. The time of tissue collections were (i) within the period of the active mineralization of antler, at the beginning of June when skeletal osteoporosis takes place, (ii) in the fitness improvement period with velvet shedding in late July, that is the 'regenerating time' and (iii) in the period of late autumn dwell at the end of November when in the skeleton the mineral mobilization and deposition are dynamically equilibrated (BMD is in steady state). Each comparison performed on Platforms GPL4052 and GPL5352.

PLATFORM
GPL4052 cDNA microarray Van Andel Institute for Day1 samples GPL5352 Van Andel Research Instittue - cDNA Human B chip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

