TITLE
Comparative genome hybridization between grapevine white-berried somatic variants and ancestral black-berried cultivars

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
Somatic variants spontaneously appear during the vegetative multiplication of woody crops. The new white-berried grapevine cultivar Tempranillo Blanco (TB) originally appeared as a bud sport of the black skin-berried Tempranillo Tinto (TT) cultivar. To understand the origin of this variation, TT and TB genomes were sequenced. Structural variation and genetic segregation analyses uncovered that complex chromosome rearrangements consistent with chromothripsis, a catastrophic phenomenon recently described in human cancer, generated the variant genome of TB and the deletion of the color locus functional allele. Loss of heterozygosity and decreased copy number delimited alternating monosomic and disomic fragments in the distal arms of TB’s linkage groups 2 and 5. Hemizygous fragments collectively extended over 8.1 Mb and comprised 313 annotated genes. Clustered breakpoints for complex chromosome rearrangements disrupting linkage groups 2 and 5 were identified and junctions involved unbalanced inter- and intra-chromosome translocations and one unbalanced inversion. Signatures of blunt fusions or microhomology-mediated end joining mechanisms were detected at breakpoint junction flanks. Segregation distortion in TB-derived selfed progeny indicated linkage of rearrangements in a single copy of the affected chromosomes that was barely transmitted. Additionally to berry color loss, these dramatic changes have further viticultural consequences in TB associated to a decreased sexual fitness. Our findings show that chromothripsis spontaneously arise during mitotic multiplication of grapevine, evidencing that this phenomenon could contribute to clonal variation in woody crops and to the evolution of plant genomes. Grapevine GrapeGen GeneChips(R) were used for partial comparative genome hybridization between black-berried cultivars and their respective white-berried somatic variants. Differences in copy number were used to estimate chromosome deletions associated to the loss of berry color.

DESIGN
Young grapevine leaves from each variant line were used for gDNA extraction. Fragmented DNA was amplified, labelled and hybridized to GrapeGen Affymetrix microarrays. Three pairs of white- and black-berried variants were compared with two biological replicates per variant.

