TITLE
Transcriptome analysis of rice roots in response to plant growth promoting bacterium Bacillus subtilis RR4

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa

SUMMARY
The aim of our study is to elucidate the gene expression changes in rice in response to colonization by a plant growth promoting rhizobacteria such as the Bacillus subtilis through microarray high throughput technology. In particular, the effect of B.subtilis on root exudation (secretion of phytochemicals through roots) will be analysed. For this rice plantlets were grown in hydroponics and treated with B.subtilis RR4 for 48 hrs. The root samples of the control and treated plants were then used for the microarray experiment. The data obtained through microarray revealed genes related to cell wall modification, phytohormone synthesis, defense response, root exudation, etc. to be differentially regulated in response to B.subtilis RR4. Real time PCR analysis of few chosen genes (OsMS, OsALMT, OsABC, OsSDH, etc) also confirmed the validity of the microarray data. The initial responses of a plant in response to colonization by the microbe will be changes in cell wall of the plant tissues and the secretion of phytochemicals to attract/repel the colonizing beneficial/pathogenic organism. From analysis of microarray data we found the cell wall related genes which aid in root colonization and the root exudate related genes (biosynthesis and transport) which play a role in providing nutrition for the bacterial growth to be differentially regulated significantly. Analysis of specific genes and their biosynthesis pathways indicated that rice plants responded positively to root colonization by B.subtilis RR4. Notable among the exudation related genes such as Malate synthase and ALMT were found to be upregulated which indicates the significant role played by organic acids particularly malate in recruiting the PGPR towards the plant roots. This recruitment will thereby facilitate plant growth. Subsequently, these genes can be engineered in crop plants to recruit beneficial bacteria which might further open new avenues for improved crop production.

DESIGN
Organism : Oryza sativa , Agilent Custom Rice Gene Expression  44x44k Array (AMADID: 064815) designed  by Genotypic Technology Private Limited.

