TITLE
Microarray analysis of minor salivary glands from patients with primary Sjögren’s syndrome (SS) or non-SS

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Objective. A variety of chemokines contribute the pathogenesis of Sjögren’s syndrome (SS). However, the comprehensive analysis as for clinically potent ckemokines in SS has not been performed. In this study, focusing on CXC chemokines, we investigated the precise molecular mechanism and the clinical significance through chemokine and its receptor in the autoimmune lesions of primary SS.   Methods. Gene expression profiles in the lip salivary glands (LSGs) from pSS patients and controls were analyzed using DNA microarray. Expression of chemokines and their receptor of biopsy samples of pSS pathients and controls were detected by immunofluorescence analysis. In addition, in vitro experiments using human salivary gland ductal and acinar cell lines were performed to analyze the expression of chemokines and signaling pathwaycytokines by qRT-PCR, ELISA, and Western blot analysis.   Results. Gene expression profiles and immunohistochemical analysis revealed that IFN-γ-induced CXCL9 and CXCL10 were significantly increased in LSGs of pSS patients. In vitro experiments revealed that the protein expression of CXCL10 in ductal and acinar cells was differentially regulated by IFN-γ or TNF-α via NF-κB or JAK/STAT pathway. Moreover, CXCR3 expression was detected mainly in CD68+ macrophages, CD123+ plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), and in a few CD3+ T cells. Finally, Spearman's rank analysis revealed a negative correlation between the existence of CXCR3+ cells and pathological grading in LSG tissues of pSS patients (r: -0.019, p < 0.01).  Conclusion. These results suggest that CXCL10/CXCR3 axis plays in a key role in autoimmune response by interaction between immune cells and target cells in the pathogenesis of pSS.

DESIGN
Using Affymetrix GeneAtlas System, we determined the gene expression profiles of minor salivary glands from 2 primary SS and 2 non-SS patients.

PLATFORM
GPL13667 [HG-U219] Affymetrix Human Genome U219 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

