TITLE
Microarray data of mouse primary E2A-PBX1 leukemia and preleukemia cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Microarray data of mouse primary E2A-PBX1 leukemias and preleukemia cells were compared to wild-type B-cell progenitor cells Aberrant activation of signaling pathways has been linked to leukemogenesis, however, little is known about cell signaling perturbations induced by fusion transcription factors. To address this, we interrogated activated signaling pathways in a comparative analysis of mouse and human leukemias expressing the chimeric fusion protein E2A-PBX1, which is present in 5-7% of pediatric and 50% of pre-B-cell receptor (preBCR+) ALL.  We describe here signaling network remodeling by E2A-PBX1 in pre-B-ALL, which results in hyperactivation of PLCγ2.  Depletion of PLCγ2 reduced proliferation of mouse and human ALLs, including E2A-PBX1 leukemias, and increased disease-free survival after secondary transplantation.  E2A-PBX1 binds and activates the transcription of its target genes ZAP70, SYK and LCK, which encode kinases upstream of PLCγ2.  Efficient shRNA-mediated depletion of the respective upstream kinases decreased cell proliferation and phosphorylated levels of PLCγ2 (pPLCγ2).  Pairwise compound knockdown of ZAP70, SYK or LCK showed additive effects on cell growth inhibition, providing a rationale for combination therapy.  Inhibition of SYK, LCK and SFK with small molecule inhibitors, including dasatinib, was highly effective in reducing pPLCγ2 and inhibiting proliferation of preBCR+ leukemias in vitro and in vivo.  Combination small molecule inhibition of SYK, LCK and SFK showed promising preclinical efficacy for preBCR+/E2A-PBX1+ leukemias.  These studies demonstrate that E2A-PBX1 induces signaling pathway perturbations upstream of PLCγ2, which render leukemias amenable to targeted therapeutic inhibition.

DESIGN
We analyzed bone marrow cells from 18 mouse E2A-PBX1 leukemia mice, from 3 healthy preleukemic mice and 9 from wild-type mice using the Affymetrix Mouse Gene 1.0 ST platform.

