TITLE
Molecular mechanism of the G1 arrest and cellular senescence induced by LEE011, novel CDK4/CDK6 inhibitor, in acute myeloid leukemia cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background  CDK4 and CDK6 are frequently over expressed or hyper activated in human cancers. Due to the importance of CDK4/6 activity in cancer cells, CDK4/6 inhibitors have emerged as promising candidates for cancer treatment. LEE011, a novel inhibitor of CDK4/6, until now the molecular function of LEE011 in acute myeloid leukemia is still unknown.   Methods    AML cell growth was assessed by CCK-8 and annexin V/propidium iodide staining followed by flow cytometry detected apoptosis in cell culture. AML cell senescence was assessed by β-Galactosidase Staining, p16INK4a expression and HP1α Staining analysis. Gene expressions of LEE011-treated tumor cells were analyzed using an Arraystar Human LncRNA Array. The Multi Experiment View cluster software analyzed the expression data. Differentially expressed genes from the cluster analyses were imported into the GO and KEGG pathway analysis.  Results   Our studies demonstrated that LEE011 inhibited proliferation of leukemia cells and do not induce apoptosis. Hoechst 33342 staining analysis showed that DNA fragmentation and abnormal nuclear cells was observed after LEE011 treatment. Cell cycle analysis showed in these eight acute leukemia cells, LEE011 induce the cell cycle G1 arrest very significantly, except THP-1 cells. Cell senescence β-Galactosidase Staining analysis, p16INK4a expression and HP1α Staining analysis all showed that LEE011 treatment can induce the cell senescence of AML cells.   LncRNA microarray was used to identify 2083 differently expressed mRNAs and 3224 differentially expressed lncRNAs in LEE011-treated HL-60 cells compared with control group. Molecular function analysis showed that LEE011 induced cellular senescence in leukemia cells partially through down regulation the transcriptional expression of MYBL2.  Conclusions   In this study, we showed for the first time that LEE011 treatment resulted in inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of G1 arrest and cellular senescence in AML cells. LncRNA microarray was used to identify differentially expressed genes and lncRNAs in LEE011-treated HL-60 cells and we demonstrated that LEE011 induce cellular senescence partially through down regulation the expression of MYBL2. These results may provide new insights into the molecular mechanism of LEE011-induced cellular senescence; however, further research will be required to determine the underlying details. Taken together, our findings firstly suggest that LEE011 may act as new candidate’s drug for AML.

DESIGN
HL-60 cells were treated with 1uM LEE011 and control group cells were treated with the same volume of DMSO 24 hours later. Human LncRNA Array analysis was performed by KangChen Bio-tech, Shanghai P.R. China.Human LncRNA Array analysis was performed by KangChen Bio-tech, Shanghai P.R. China.  Total RNA from each sample was quantified by the NanoDrop ND-1000 and RNA integrity was assessed by standard denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis. For microarray analysis, Agilent Array platform was employed. The sample preparation and microarray hybridization were performed based on the manufacturer’s standard protocols with minor modifications. Briefly, mRNA was purified from total RNA after removal of rRNA (mRNA-ONLY™ Eukaryotic mRNA Isolation Kit, Epicentre). Then, each sample was amplified and transcribed into fluorescent cRNA along the entire length of the transcripts without 3’ bias utilizing a random priming method. The labeled cRNAs were hybridized onto the Human LncRNA Array v2.0 (8 x 60K, Arraystar). After having washed the slides, the arrays were scanned by the Agilent Scanner G2505C.  Agilent Feature Extraction software (version 11.0.1.1) was used to analyze acquired array images. Quantile normalization and subsequent data processing were performed using the GeneSpring GX v12.0 software package (Agilent Technologies). After quantile normalization of the raw data, LncRNAs and mRNAs that at least 4 out of 6 samples have flags in Present or Marginal (“All Targets Value”) were chosen for further data analysis. Differentially expressed LncRNAs and mRNAs with statistical significance between the two groups were identified through Volcano Plot filtering. Pathway analysis and GO analysis were applied to determine the roles of these differentially expressed mRNAs played in these biological pathways or GO terms. Finally, Hierarchical Clustering was performed to show the distinguishable LncRNAs and mRNAs expression pattern among samples.

PLATFORM
GPL16956 Agilent-045997 Arraystar human lncRNA microarray V3 (Probe Name Version)

CITATIONS
28286417

