TITLE
Differential gene expression underlying ovarian phenotype determination in honey bee, Apis mellifera, caste development

ORGANISM
Apis mellifera

SUMMARY
Adult honey bee queens and workers drastically differ in ovary size. This adult ovary phenotype difference becomes established during the last two larval instars, when massive programmed cell death in the ovaries of worker larvae leads to the degeneration and removal of 95-99% of the ovariole anlagen. The higher juvenile hormone (JH) levels in queen larvae protect their ovaries against such degeneration. To gain insights into the molecular architecture underlying this divergence critical for adult caste fate we performed a microarray analysis contrasting RNA extracts from fourth and early fifth instar queen and worker ovaries. While for the fourth instar we found differential expression (log2FC > 1.0) for only nine genes, the number of differentially represented transcripts (DRTs) increased to 56 in early fifth instar ovaries. From these, 18 had their expression levels further analyzed by real-time PCR (RT-qPCR). For 13 of these the expression differed significantly between queen and worker ovaries at least one time point in development, and interestingly, genes with enzyme functions were overexpressed in workers, while genes related to transcription and signaling were so in queens. For the RT-qPCR confirmed genes we further analyzed their response to JH, revealing a significant up-regulation for two genes, one encoding a short chain dehydrogenase (SDR) and the other heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90). Five other genes, including Hsp60 and hexamerin 70b, were significantly down-regulated by JH. As SDR genes have previously come up as differentially expressed in different transcriptome assays in honey bee larvae, and heat shock proteins are involved in hormone responses, these are interesting candidates for further functional assays.

DESIGN
RNA samples (from pools of ovaries) from L4 and L5F queens and workers were hybridized in pairs (queen/worker) and in dye-swaps (Cy3/Cy5).

PLATFORM
GPL14758 UIUC Honey bee oligo 13K v1

CITATIONS
27720811

