TITLE
Phytoplankton assemblage during the North Atlantic spring bloom assessed from functional gene analysis

ORGANISM
synthetic construct ; seawater metagenome

SUMMARY
The spring bloom in the North Atlantic develops over a few weeks in response to the physical stabilization of the nutrient replete water column and is one of the biggest biological signals on earth. The composition of the phytoplankton assemblage during the spring bloom of 2008 was evaluated, using a microarray, on the basis of functional genes that encode key enzymes in nitrogen and carbon assimilation in eukaryotic and prokaryotic phytoplankton. Oligonucleotide archetype probes representing RuBisCO, nitrate reductase and nitrate transporter genes from major phytoplankton classes detected a diverse assemblage. For RuBisCO, the archetypes with strongest signals represented known phytoplankton groups, but for the nitrate related genes, the major signals were not closely related to any known phytoplankton sequences. Most of the assemblage's components exhibited consistent temporal/spatial patterns. Yet, the strongest archetype signals often showed quite different patterns, indicating different ecological responses by the main players. The most abundant phytoplankton genera identified previously by microscopy, however, were not well represented on the microarray. The lack of sequence data for well-studied species, and the inability to identify organisms associated with functional gene sequences in the environment, still limits our understanding of phytoplankton ecology even in this relatively well-studied system.

DESIGN
Two color array (Cy3 and Cy5): the universal standard 20-mer oligo is printed to the slide with a 70-mer oligo (an archetype).  Environmental DNA sequences (fluoresced with Cy3) within 15% of the 70-mer conjugated to a 20-mer oligo (fluoresced with Cy5) complementary to the universal standard will bind to the oligo probes on the array.  Signal is the ratio of Cy3 to Cy5.  Two replicate arrays were run on duplicate targets.

PLATFORM
GPL21842 Microarrays Inc. seawater metagenome array BC013

CITATIONS
Ward, B. B. and N. C. Van Oostende (2016). Phytoplankton assemblage during the North Atlantic spring bloom assessed from functional gene analysis. Journal of Plankton Research.  Doi: 10.1093/plankt/fbw043

