TITLE
Effects of halogenated boroxine on expression of human cancer drug targets in melanoma cell line

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Recently it was found that dipotassium-trioxohydroxytetrafluorotriborate, K2(B3O3F4OH), is a  potent and highly specific inhibitor of precancerous cell processes. We conducted gene  expression profiling of human melanoma cells before and after treatment with two  concentrations (0.1 and 1 mM) of this boron inorganic derivative in order to assess its effects  on deregulation of genes associated with tumor pathways. Parallel trypan blue exclusion assay  was performed to assess the cytotoxicity effects of this chemical. Treatment with K2(B3O3F4OH)  induced a significant decrease of cell viability in melanoma cellline at both tested  concentrations. Furthermore, these treatments caused deregulation of more than 30 genes  known as common anti-tumor drug targets. IGF-1 and hTERT were found to be significantly  downregulated and this result may imply potential use of K2(B3O3F4OH) as an inhibitor or  human telomerase and insulin-like growth factor 1, both of which are associated with various  tumor pathways.

DESIGN
Upon the treatment of melanoma cells by K2(B3O3F4OH) in the  above-mentioned manner, total RNA was extracted from harvested  cells using RNA isolation kit (QIAGEN GmbH, Hilden,  Germany).Human Cancer Drug Targets RT2 Profiler PCR  method is used according to manufacturer’s instructions (RT2  Profiler PCR Array Handbook, Qiagen N. V., Venlo, Limburg,  Netherlands) for a multigene profiling of expression of 84 genes  (Table 2) on ABI 7300 real-time PCR apparatus (Applied  Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The three cell populations used in  the experiment (cell culture control sample and two cell cultures  treated with K2(B3O3F4OH) in concentrations of 0.1mM and  1mM) were subsequently analyzed in three identical 96 wells array  formats. The quality check up (false positive and false negative  signals evaluation) was based on positive and negative controls  included on arrays, as well as gDNA contamination probes.

PLATFORM
GPL21846 Human Cancer Drug Targets RT2 Profiler

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

