TITLE
Low-dose exposure to 17alpha-ethinylestradiol rapidly regulates expression networks of gonad differentiation in the adult fathead minnow testes

ORGANISM
Pimephales promelas

SUMMARY
Environmental estrogens are ubiquitous in aquatic systems worldwide.  In wild fish inhabiting wastewater effluent with estrogenic components, the presence of both oocytes and spermatogenic tissue in the testes has been documented. However, the molecular networks underlying the manifestation of the intersex condition are not completely characterized. In this study, we used an environmentally relevant concentration of 17alpha-ethinylestradiol (EE2), the active component of the birth control pill, to determine the response of the fathead minnow testis transcriptome after 96 hrs. The goal was to capture early molecular initiating events that may lead to the intersex condition following exposure to an estrogen that is present in wastewater effluent. There were no effects of EE2 on morphometric endpoints such as gonadosomatic index nor proportion of gametes within the testes.  However, in vitro production of 11-ketotestosterone and testosterone in the testis was decreased relative to controls following EE2 exposure.  Gene expression profiling revealed that there were 10 transcripts that were differentially expressed in the testis using a 8x60K fathead minnow microarray, the most dramatic change being that of coagulation factor XIII A chain (20-fold increase).  Transcripts that included guanine nucleotide binding protein (Beta Polypeptide 2), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta, and WNK lysine deficient protein kinase 1a, were down-regulated by EE2. Subnetwork enrichment analysis revealed that EE2 suppressed transcriptional networks associated with reproduction such as steroid metabolism, hormone biosynthesis, and sperm mobility. Most interesting was that gene networks associated with doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 1 (dmrt1) were suppressed in the adult testis, despite the fact that dnmt1 itself was not differentially expressed from controls. Moreover cell processes involving forkhead box L2 (foxL2) such as ovarian follicle development and granulosa cell development were increased in expression in the testis. Cell processes that included glucose homeostasis, response to heavy metal, amino acid catabolism, and the cyclooxygenase pathway were decreased with EE2 while lymphocyte chemotaxis, intermediate filament polymerization, glucocorticoid metabolism, carbohydrate utilization, and anterior/posterior axis specification were increased, shedding light on the transcriptional responses that may be perturbed prior to gonadal remodelling following exposure to estrogenic contaminants.  These data demonstrate that low concentrations of EE2 rapidly suppresses male hormone secretion, suppresses gene networks related to male sex differentiation, and induces transcriptional networks related to female sexual differentiation in the adult testis. These responses are hypothesized to be the molecular initiating events that occur prior to the development of the intersex phenotype after prolonged exposures to estrogens.

DESIGN
8 biological replicates per group.  2 groups, control and EE2 treated.

PLATFORM
GPL15775 Agilent-036574 FHM_8x60K_V2

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

