TITLE
Systems genetics reveals a transcriptional network associated with susceptibility in the maize-gray leaf spot pathosystem

ORGANISM
Zea mays

SUMMARY
Background: Maize plants developed typical gray leaf spot disease (GLS) symptoms initiating at the lower leaves and progressing to upper leaves through the season.  Leaf material was collected at 77 days after planting, at which stage there were a large number of GLS disease necrotic lesions on lower leaves (8% surface area on average determined by digital image analysis), but very few lesions and only at chlorotic stage on leaves above the ear (average of 0.2% lesion surface area). Method:To collect material that reflected a difference between C.zeina infected B73 leaves and control B73 leaf material, samples were collected from two lower GLS infected leaves (second and third leaf internode below ear) , and two upper leaves with minimal GLS symptoms (second and third internode above ear), respectively.  The two lower leaves from each plant were pooled prior to RNA extraction, and the two upper leaves from each plant were pooled prior to RNA extraction.  Upper and lower leaf samples from three maize B73 plants were subjected to RNA sequencing individually. The three maize plants were selected randomly as one plant per row from three rows of ten B73 plants each. Result: A systems genetics strategy revealed regions on the maize genome underlying co-expression of genes in susceptible and resistance responses, including a set of 100 genes common to the susceptible response of sub-tropical and temperate maize.

DESIGN
To collect material that reflected a difference between C.zeina infected B73 leaves and control B73 leaf material, samples were collected from two lower GLS infected leaves (second and third leaf internode below ear) , and two upper leaves with minimal GLS symptoms (second and third internode above ear), respectively.  The two lower leaves from each plant were pooled prior to RNA extraction, and the two upper leaves from each plant were pooled prior to RNA extraction.  Upper and lower leaf samples from three maize B73 plants were subjected to RNA sequencing individually. The three maize plants were selected randomly as one plant per row from three rows of ten B73 plants each.

PLATFORM
GPL15463 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Zea mays)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

