TITLE
The deubiquitinase OTU5 controls environmentally responsive root hair morphogenesis in Arabidopsis and is required for preserving DNA methylation patterns

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Ovarian tumor domain (OTU)-containing proteins comprise a novel family of deubiquitilating proteins that is largely unexplored in Arabidopsis. We here report on the functional characterization of one member of this family, OTU5. Homozygous otu5 mutants formed long and dense root hairs under control conditions, resembling phosphate (Pi)-deficient plants. Conversely, when grown on low Pi media, root hair length of otu5 plants was decreased relative to the wild type. In the wild type, lateral root formation was increased by Pi starvation; no such increase was observed in otu5. Whole genome bisulfite sequencing revealed that OTU5 is critically involved in cytosine DNA methylation (mC) of local regions in the genome enriched in gene bodies and exons. Several genes encoding proteins with critical roles in root hair morphogenesis were differentially methylated but not differentially expressed between otu5 and the wild type, suggesting that mC affects post-transcriptional regulation of these genes and has little direct impact on transcription. Pi supply had strong effects on the transcriptional profiles that were largely incongruent between the two genotypes. Pi starvation had only minor effect on mC, was largely restricted to intergenic regions and transposable elements, and was discordant with gene expression changes. It is concluded that OTU5 is involved in the maintenance of methylation patterns that are critical for the orchestration of cis- and trans-acting elements required for the regulation of the morphological response to Pi starvation.

DESIGN
To understand the role of OTU5 in root development and in the alterations in root developmental programs induced by Pi starvation, we performed a comprehensive assessment of the transcriptional profiles and DNA methylation patterns of the otu5 mutant and its wild type under control and Pi deficient-conditions.

PLATFORM
GPL13222 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Arabidopsis thaliana) GPL17639 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Arabidopsis thaliana)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

