TITLE
Intermittent hypoxia confers pro-metastatic gene expression selectively through NF-kB in inflammatory breast cancer cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is the most aggressive form of breast cancer. Treatment options are limited and the mechanisms underlying its aggressiveness are poorly understood. Intermittent hypoxia (IH) causes oxidative stress and is emerging as important regulator of tumor metastasis. Vessels in IBC tumors were shown to be immature, which is a primary cause of IH. We therefore investigated the relevance of IH for the modulation of gene expression in IBC cells in order to assess IH as potential regulator of IBC aggressiveness. Gene array analysis of IBC cells following chronic IH (45-60 days) demonstrated increased expression of pro-metastatic genes of the extracellular matrix, such as tenascin-C (TNC; an essential factor of the metastatic niche) and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9), and of pro-inflammatory processes, such as cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). Investigating the oxidative stress-dependent regulation of TNC, we found a gradual sensitivity on mRNA and protein levels. Oxidative stress activated NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), c-Jun and nuclear factor κB (NF-κB), but TNC upregulation was only dependent on NF-κB activation. Pharmacological inhibition of inhibitor of NF-κB α (IκBα) phosphorylation as well as overexpression of IκBα prevented TNC, MMP9 and COX-2 induction, whereas the pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-1β (IL-1β) increased their expression levels. Analysis of the gene array data showed NF-κB binding sites for 64% of all upregulated genes, linking NF-κB and IH-dependent regulation of pro-metastatic gene expression in IBC cells. Our results provide a first link between intermittent hypoxia and pro-metastatic gene expression in IBC cells, revealing a putative novel mechanism for the high metastatic potential of IBC.

DESIGN
SUM149PT cells were seeded. Following 24 h one part was harvested for analysis of gene expression of untreated cells (0 h). The other part was cultured for 45 days in intermittent hypoxia conditions (24 h 0.2% O2 alternated with 48 h 21% O2). RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays was performed to compare gene expression after 45 days in IH conditions with the gene expression of untreated cells at the timepoint 0 h. One biological replicate was analyzed.

PLATFORM
GPL17692 [HuGene-2_1-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 2.1 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
27717868

