TITLE
Genome-wide transcriptional profiling of peripheral blood mononuclear cells challenged with Theileria annulata in crossbred and indigenous cattle of India

ORGANISM
Bos indicus ; Bos taurus x Bos indicus

SUMMARY
Bovine tropical theileriosis is a major haemoprotozoan disease associated with high rates of morbidity and mortality particularly in exotic and crossbred cattle. It is one of the major constraints for of the livestock development programmes in India and southern Asia. Indigenous cattle (Bos indicus) are less affected by this disease than exotic and crossbred cattle. Genetic basis of resistance to tropical theileriosis in indigenous cattle is not well studied. Recent studies gives an idea that differentially genes expressed in exotic and indigenous breeds play an important role in breed specific resistance to tropical theileriosis. The present study was designed to visualize the global gene expression profiling in PBMCs derived from indigenous (Tharparkar) and crossbred cattle with in vitro infection of T. annulata. T. annulata Parbhani strain, originally isolated from Maharashtra (India) and maintained as cryopreserved stabilates of ground-up tick tissue sporozoite (GUTS) of infected H. anatolicum anatolicum was used as infective material. Two separate microarray experiments were carried out using separately each for crossbred and Tharparkar cattle. The crossbred cattle showed 1082 differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Out of total DEGs, 597 genes were downregulated and 485 were upregulated. Their fold change varies from 2283.93 to -4816.02. Tharparkar cattle showed 875 differentially expressed genes. Out of total DEGs in Tharparkar cattle, 451 genes were downregulated and 424 genes were upregulated. Their fold change varies from 94.93 to -19.20. A subset of genes was validated by quantitative RT-PCR and results correlated well with data obtained from the microarrays indicating that the microarray results gave an accurate report of transcript level. Functional annotation study of differentially expressed genes has confirmed their involvement in various pathways including response to oxidative stress, immune system regulation, cell proliferation, cytoskeletal changes, kinases activity and apoptosis. Gene network analysis of these differentially expressed genes provided an effective way to understand the interaction among them. It is therefore, hypothesised that the dissimilar susceptibility to tropical theileriosis exhibited by indigenous and crossbred cattle is due to breed-specific differences in the interaction of infected cells with other immune cells, which ultimately influences the immune response generated against T. annulata infection.

DESIGN
Global gene expression profiling in PBMCs derived from indigenous (Tharparkar) and crossbred cattle were studied after in vitro infection of T. annulata Parbhani strain at 2h time period. Two separate microarray experiments were carried out using Bovine (V2) Gene Expression Microarray, 4x44K (Agilent). Two biological replicate samples were profiled per condition (i.e. replicates samples each in crossbred and Tharparkar cattle).

PLATFORM
GPL11648 Agilent-023647 B. taurus (Bovine) Oligo Microarray v2 (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

