TITLE
Cytoplasmic Localization of Proline, Glutamic Acid, Leucine-rich Protein 1 (PELP1) Induces Breast Epithelial Cell Migration through Up-regulation of Inhibitor of κB Kinase ϵ and Inflammatory Cross-talk with Macrophages

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Cytoplasmic localization of proline, glutamic acid, leucine-rich protein 1 (PELP1) is observed in ∼40% of women with invasive breast cancer. In mouse models, PELP1 overexpression in the mammary gland leads to premalignant lesions and eventually mammary tumors. In preliminary clinical studies, cytoplasmic localization of PELP1 was seen in 36% of women at high risk of developing breast cancer. Here, we investigated whether cytoplasmic PELP1 signaling promotes breast cancer initiation in models of immortalized human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs). Global gene expression analysis was performed on HMEC lines expressing vector control, PELP1-wt, or mutant PELP1 in which the nuclear localization sequence was altered, resulting in cytoplasmic localization of PELP1 (PELP1-cyto). Global gene expression analysis identified that PELP1-cyto expression in HMECs induced NF-κB signaling pathways. Western blotting analysis of PELP1-cyto HMECs showed up-regulation of inhibitor of κB kinase ϵ (IKKϵ) and increased phosphorylation of the NF-κB subunit RelB. To determine whether secreted factors produced by PELP1-cyto HMECs promote macrophage activation, THP-1 macrophages were treated with HMEC-conditioned medium (CM). PELP1-cyto CM induced changes in THP-1 gene expression as compared with control cell CM. Double conditioned medium (DCM) from the activated THP-1 cells was then applied to HMECs to determine whether paracrine signaling from PELP1-cyto-activated macrophages could in turn promote migration of HMECs. PELP1-cyto DCM induced robust HMEC migration, which was reduced in DCM from PELP1-cyto HMECs expressing IKKϵ shRNA. Our findings suggest that cytoplasmic localization of PELP1 up-regulates pro-tumorigenic IKKϵ and secreted inflammatory signals, which through paracrine macrophage activation regulates the migratory phenotype associated with breast cancer initiation.

DESIGN
The study contains 3 different sample groups measured in duplicate for a total of 6 individual samples (6 arrays). In HMEC-hTERT cell lines (human mammary epithelial cells, immortalized with hTERT expression), we created three stable clones expressing either (1) vector control LXSN, or (2) the wild type form of PELP1, or (3) a cytoplasmic-only version of PELP1 (via mutation of the NLS). These three cell lines were cultured in HuMEC Ready Media supplemented with epidermal growth factor, hydrocortisone, isoproterenol, transferrin, insulin, and 25 mg of bovine pituitary extract before total RNA harvest. Thus, the experiment contains three cell lines, analyzed in duplicate. Standard Illumina HT-12v4 chip controls were used during hybridization.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
27881676

