TITLE
Genomic characterization of liver metastases from colorectal cancer patients [PrimeView]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Metastatic dissemination is the most frequent cause of death sporadic colorectal cancer (sCRC) patients. The genomic abnormalities which are potentially characteristic of such advanced stages of the disease are complex and so far, they have been poorly described and only partially understood. We evaluate the molecular heterogeneity of sCRC tumors based on simultaneous assessment of the overall GEP of both coding mRNA and non-coding RNA genes in primary sCRC tumor samples from 23 consecutive patients and their paired liver metastases. Liver metastases from the sCRC patients analyzed, systematically showed deregulated transcripts of those genes identified as also deregulated in their paired primary colorectal carcinomas. However, some transcripts were found to be specifically deregulated in liver metastases while expressed at normal levels in their primary tumors, suggesting an increased genomic instability of neoplastic cells from metastatic versus primary tumor samples. Of note, once tumoral samples were normalized vs. non-tumoral colorectal tissue, only three mRNAS (i.e.: DEFB1, COL12A and PTGER3) and one miRNA (i.e.: miR-572) emerged as significantly deregulated in the liver metastases vs. the primary tumor. Canonical pathways found to be specifically deregulated in liver metastatic samples included multiple genes related with intercellular adhesion and the metastatic processes (e.g., IGF1R, PIK3CA, PTEN and EGFR), endocytosis (e.g., the PDGFRA, SMAD2, ERBB3, PML and FGFR2), and cell cycle (e.g., SMAD2, CCND2, E2F5 and MYC). Our results also highlight the activation of genes associated with the TGFβ signaling pathway, which thereby emerge as candidate genes to play an important role in CRC tumor metastasis.

DESIGN
Tissue specimens from 23 sporadic colorectal adenocarcinomas and 19 liver metastases (n=42 samples) were obtained from 23 patients with metastatic lesions susceptible of being resected (16 males and 7 females; median age of 66 years, ranging from 48 to 80 years) after informed consent had been given by each subject. The studied cases corresponded to 23 consecutive metastatic colorectal cancer patients.

PLATFORM
GPL15207 [PrimeView] Affymetrix Human Gene Expression Array

CITATIONS
27662660

