TITLE
MicroRNA-31 promotes adverse cardiac remodeling and dysfunction in ischemic heart disease.

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
RATIONALE: Myocardial infarction (MI) triggers a dynamic microRNA response with the potential of yielding therapeutic targets. OBJECTIVE: We aimed to identify novel aberrantly expressed cardiac microRNAs post-MI with potential roles in adverse remodeling in a rat model, and to provide post-ischemic therapeutic inhibition of a candidate pathological microRNA in vivo. METHODS AND RESULTS: Following microRNA array profiling in rat hearts 2 and 14days post-MI, we identified a time-dependent up-regulation of miR-31 compared to sham-operated rats. A progressive increase of miR-31 (up to 91.4±11.3 fold) was detected in the infarcted myocardium by quantitative real-time PCR. Following target prediction analysis, reporter gene assays confirmed that miR-31 targets the 3´UTR of cardiac troponin-T (Tnnt2), E2F transcription factor 6 (E2f6), mineralocorticoid receptor (Nr3c2) and metalloproteinase inhibitor 4 (Timp4) mRNAs. In vitro, hypoxia and oxidative stress up-regulated miR-31 and suppressed target genes in cardiac cell cultures, whereas LNA-based oligonucleotide inhibition of miR-31 (miR-31i) reversed its repressive effect on target mRNAs. Therapeutic post-ischemic administration of miR-31i in rats silenced cardiac miR-31 and enhanced expression of target genes, while preserving cardiac structure and function at 2 and 4weeks post-MI. Left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) improved by 10% (from day 2 to 30 post-MI) in miR-31i-treated rats, whereas controls receiving scrambled LNA inhibitor or placebo incurred a 17% deterioration in EF. miR-31i decreased end-diastolic pressure and infarct size; attenuated interstitial fibrosis in the remote myocardium and enhanced cardiac output. CONCLUSION: miR-31 induction after MI is deleterious to cardiac function while its therapeutic inhibition in vivo ameliorates cardiac dysfunction and prevents the development of post-ischemic adverse remodeling.

DESIGN
In the study presented, 345 miRNAs were profiled in two samples- sham and MI at Day 2 and 656 miRNAs at Day 14. Each samples were pooled from 3 rats from the same groups.

PLATFORM
GPL21885 Exiqon miRCURY LNATM microRNA Array, v.11.0

CITATIONS
28865712

