TITLE
Cordyceps promotes MKK7-JNK signaling pathway by reducing NF-κB/GADD45b signaling activation to induce apoptosis in TK-10 renal cell carcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Cordyceps participates in various pharmacological activities including anti-tumor, and is involved in the regulation of NF-κB signaling pathway. However, the detailed role of cordycepin in suppression of NF-κB signaling pathway is less clear. In this study, we first analyzed the effect of cordyceps on NF-κB activity in TK-10 cells, and found that cordyceps resulted in a dose-dependent reduction in TNF-α-induced NF-κB activation. Here, we show that cordyceps mediated NF-kB inhibition induces apoptosis in TK-10 cells involved the serial activation of caspases. Moreover, we demonstrate that in addition to activating caspases, the cordyceps negatively modulates TNF-α-mediated NF-κB signaling to promote JNK activation, which results in apoptosis, and that NF-kB regulates antiapoptotic factor GADD45b and the JNK kinase MKK7. When the TNFα cytokine binds to the TNF receptor, IκB dissociates from NF-κB. As a result, the active NF-κB translocates to the nucleus. Cordyceps clearly prevented NF-κB from mobilizing to the nucleus, resulting in downregulation of GADD45b, whereas upregulation of MKK7 and phosphorylation of JNK (p-JNK). This increased Bax activation, leading to marked cordyceps-induced apoptosis. Bax subfamily proteins induced apoptosis through caspase-3. Furthermore, siRNA mediated inhibition of MKK7 downregulated p-JNK and The JNK inhibitor SP600125 strongly inhibited Bax. Thus, these results indicate that cordyceps inhibits NF-κB/GADD45b signaling activation to upregulate MKK7-JNK signaling pathway to induce apoptosis in TK-10 cells and support the potential of cordyceps as a therapeutic agent for renal cancer.

DESIGN
TK-10 renal cells were treated with 0.1% DMSO, cordyceps 750 ug/mL, and sunitinib 10uM for 48hrs.

PLATFORM
GPL21185 Agilent-072363 SurePrint G3 Human GE v3 8x60K Microarray 039494 [Probe Name Version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

