TITLE
An excitatory ARC to PVH circuit that rapidly induces satiety and is regulated by α-MSH

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Neurons in the arcuate nucleus (ARC) sense the fed/fasted state and regulate hunger.  ARCAgRP neurons release GABA, NPY and the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) antagonist, AgRP, and are activated by fasting1-4.  When stimulated, they rapidly and potently drive hunger5,6.  ARCPOMC neurons, in contrast, release the MC4R agonist, α-MSH, and are viewed as the counterpoint to ARCAgRP neurons.  They are regulated in an opposite fashion and their activity leads to decreased hunger2,4,7.  Together, ARCAgRP and ARCPOMC neurons constitute the ARC feeding center.  Against this, however, is the finding that ARCPOMC neurons, unlike ARCAgRP neurons, fail to affect food intake over the timescale of minutes to hours following opto- or chemogenetic stimulation5,8.  This suggests a rapidly acting component of the ARC satiety pathway is missing.  Here, we show that excitatory ARC neurons identified by expression of vesicular glutamate transporter 2 (VGLUT2) and the oxytocin receptor, unlike ARCPOMC neurons, rapidly cause satiety when chemo- or optogenetically manipulated.  These glutamatergic ARC projections synaptically converge with GABAergic ARCAgRP projections on MC4R-expressing neurons in the paraventricular hypothalamus (PVHMC4R neurons), which are known to mediate satiety9.  ARCPOMC neurons also send dense projections to the PVH.  Importantly, the α-MSH they release post-synaptically potentiates glutamatergic synaptic activity onto PVHMC4R neurons – including that emanating from ARCVglut2 neurons.  This suggests a means by which α-MSH can bring about satiety – via postsynaptic potentiation of this novel ARCVglut2 to PVHMC4R satiety circuit.  Thus, while fast (GABA and NPY) and slow (AgRP) ARC hunger signals are delivered together by ARCAgRP neurons10,11, the temporally analogous satiety signals from the ARC, glutamate and α-MSH, are delivered separately by two parallel, interacting projections (from ARCVGLUT2 and ARCPOMC neurons).  Discovery of this rapidly acting excitatory ARC → PVH satiety circuit, and its regulation by α-MSH, provides new insight into regulation of hunger/satiety.

DESIGN
23 samples representing single neurons dissociated from the arcuate hypothalamus of two young adult male vGLUT2-IRES-Cre mice

PLATFORM
GPL17021 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
27869800

