TITLE
RNA-sequencing of human skeletal myocytes from healthy, obese, and type 2 diabetic subjects

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Skeletal muscle is one of the primary tissues involved in the development of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Obesity is tightly associated with T2D, making it challenging to isolate specific effects attributed to the disease alone. By using an in vitro myocyte model system we were able to isolate the inherent properties retained in myocytes originating from donor muscle precursor cells, without being confounded by varying extracellular factors present in the in vivo environment of the donor. We generated and characterized transcriptional profiles of myocytes from 24 human subjects, using a factorial design with two levels each of the factors T2D (healthy or diseased) and obesity (non-obese or obese), and determined the influence of each specific factor on genome-wide transcription. We identified a striking similarity of the transcriptional profiles associated independently with T2D or obesity. Obesity thus presents an inherent phenotype in skeletal myocytes, similar to that induced by T2D. Through bioinformatics analysis we found a candidate epigenetic mechanism, H3K27me3 histone methylation, mediating the observed transcriptional signatures. Functional characterization of the expression profiles revealed dysregulated myogenesis and down-regulated muscle function in connection with T2D and obesity, as well as up-regulation of genes involved in inflammation and the extracellular matrix. Further on, we identified a metabolite subnetwork involved in sphingolipid metabolism and affected by transcriptional up-regulation in T2D. Collectively, these findings pinpoint transcriptional changes that are hard-wired in skeletal myocytes in connection with both obesity and T2D.

DESIGN
Isolated skeletal muscle precursor cells from 24 males and females (6 normal glucose tolerant, 6 obese, 6 type 2 diabetic, and 6 obese and type 2 diabetic) were differentiated in vitro and stimulated with insulin. RNA from fully differentiated myotubes sampled at 0, 0.5, 1, and 2 hours after insulin stimulation was quantified using RNA-seq (96 samples in total). The 6 base-line (0h) samples from normal glucose tolerant individuals are available under the submission GSE63887, the remaining 90 samples are contained in this submission.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens) GPL16791 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
28545587

