TITLE
Dose-dependent metabolic reprogramming and differential gene expression in TCDD-elicited hepatic fibrosis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
We have previously shown that in response to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-elicited NAFLD progression, central carbon, glutaminolysis and serine/folate metabolism are reprogrammed to support NADPH production and ROS defenses. To further investigate underlying dose-dependent responses associated with TCDD-induced fibrosis, female C57BL/6 mice were gavaged with TCDD every 4 days (d) for 28d or 92d. RNA-Seq, ChIP-Seq (2hr), and 28d metabolomic (urine, serum, and hepatic extract) analyses were conducted with complementary serum marker assessments at 92d. Additional vehicle and 30 µg/kg treatment groups were allowed to recover for 36d following the 92d treatment regimen to examine recovery from TCDD-elicited fibrosis. Histopathology revealed dose-dependent increases in hepatic fat accumulation, inflammation, and periportal collagen deposition at 92d, with increased fibrotic severity in the recovery group. Serum proinflammatory and profibrotic interleukins-1β, -2, -4, -6, and -10, as well as TNFα and IFNγ, exhibited dose-dependent induction. An increase in glucose tolerance was observed with a concomitant 3.0-fold decrease in hepatic glycogen linked to increased ascorbic acid biosynthesis and proline metabolism, consistent with increased fibrosis. RNA-Seq identified differential expression of numerous matrisome genes including an 8.8-fold increase in Tgfb2 indicating myofibroblast activation. Further analysis suggests reprogramming of glycogen, ascorbic acid, and amino acid metabolism in support of collagen deposition and the use of proline as a substrate for ATP production via the proline cycle. Conclusion: In addition to metabolic reprogramming in support of NADPH production for ROS defense, we demonstrate that glycogen, ascorbic acid, and amino acid metabolism are also reorganized to support remodeling of the extracellular matrix, progressing to hepatic fibrosis in response to chronic injury from TCDD.

DESIGN
Three biological replicates for each dose (0.01, 0.03, 0.1, 0.3, 1, 3, 10, 30) of TCDD and sesame oil vehicle. Gavaged every 4 days for 92 days.

