TITLE
MicroRNA-expression in tonsillar and base of tongue cancer related to HPV and clinical outcome

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Human papillomavirus-16 (HPV) causes the majority of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (OPSCC), especially tonsillar and base of tongue cancer. HPV-positive cancer patients have better clinical outcomes than HPV-negative patients and several groups have suggested de-intensification of treatment schedules in order to avoid unnecessary side effects in the former group. Current TNM classification falls short in predicting OPSCC patients’ prognosis highlighting the unmet need for novel biomarkers. Here we tested the expression and the prognostic role of microRNAs (miRs) in relation to HPV status and clinical outcome in 220 patients with OPSCC distributed in three independent cohorts. Methods: MiR expression was assessed in three cohorts of OPSCC patients by NanoString nCounter Technology (training; n=78), Real-Time PCR (validation; n=93) and miR-Sequencing (TCGA; n=51).  In-Situ Hybridization was used to define miR localization.  Differences in progression free (PFS) and overall survival (OS) according to miR expression were assessed using the Kaplan-Meier method and compared using the log rank test.  Univariate and multivariate analyses using Cox proportional hazards method established the relationship between miR expression, HPV-status, clinical-pathological variables and survival. Results: miR-155 and miR-193b-3p were dysregulated in HPV-negative compared to HPV-positive OPSCC. MiR-193b-3p up-regulation was associated with worse PFS and OS in the training and validation cohorts and the TCGA cohort respectively. MiR-193b-3p prognostic effect was independent of HPV-status. Among HPV-positive patients, over-expression of miR-301b and down-modulation of miR-185b correlated with improved survival. Conclusion: Expression analysis for specific miRs in combination with tumor HPV-status and clinical-pathological variables may be useful in the prediction of clinical outcome for OPSCC patients.

DESIGN
microRNA-expression was tested in OPSCC (TR) cancer and 18 controls (HT).

PLATFORM
GPL21968 Nanostring nCounter Human microRNA

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

