TITLE
New insights into antifungal resistance mechanisms in Fusarium species revealed by high throughput sequencing

ORGANISM
Fusarium oxysporum ; Fusarium solani

SUMMARY
Fusarium spp. are fungal pathogens of humans and plants. Fusarium oxysporum and Fusarium solani are important species isolated from infections such as onychomycosis, fungal keratitis, invasive infections, and disseminated diseases. These pathologies have a very difficult therapeutic management and poor therapeutic responses, especially in patients with disseminated infection. Little information is available regarding the molecular mechanisms responsible for antifungal resistance in these fungi. methods: In this study, we performed a quantitative analysis of the transcriptional profile of F. oxysporum and F. solani, challenged with amphotericin B (AMB) and posaconazole (PSC) using RNA-seq. Quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to validate the results results: Several genes related to mechanisms of antifungal resistance such as efflux pumps, ergosterol pathway synthesis, and responses to oxidative stress were found. Genes such as ERG11, ERG5, the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS), thioredoxin, and different dehydrogenase genes may explain the reduced susceptibility of Fusarium spp. against azoles and the possible mechanisms that may play an important role in induced resistance against polyenes. conclusions: Important differences in the levels of transcriptional expression were found between F. oxysporum and F. solani exposed to the two different antifungal treatments. Knowledge on the gene expression profiles and gene regulatory networks in Fusarium spp. during exposure to antifungal compounds, may help to identify possible molecular targets for the development of novel, better, and more specific therapeutic compounds.

DESIGN
profile transcriptional of Fusarium spp changed to antifungal treatments in vitro

PLATFORM
GPL21965 Illumina MiSeq (Fusarium oxysporum) GPL21966 Illumina MiSeq (Fusarium solani)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

