TITLE
Global transcriptome analysis of B. burgdorferi during adherence and invasion of human neuroglial cells

ORGANISM
Borreliella burgdorferi ; Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
As adherence and entry of a pathogen into a host cell are two key components to an infection, identifying the molecular mechanisms responsible for cellular association will provide a better understanding of a microbe’s ability for pathogenesis.  We previously established an in vitro model for B. burgdorferi invasion of human neuroglial cells.  To expand on our earlier study, we performed B. burgdorferi whole-genome expression analysis following a 20-hour infection of human neuroglial cells to identify borrelial genes that were differentially regulated during cellular attachment and invasion as compared with cultured Borrelia in cell-free medium.  This study identifies several regulated genes, the products of which may be important mediators for cellular pathogenesis. Keywords: in-vitro H4 neuroglial cells infected with B. burgdorferi

DESIGN
A 20-hour incubation was performed, and this time point included B. burgdorferi that were both intra- and extra-cellularly localized to the H4 cells (Livengood and Gilmore, 2006).  After B. burgdorferi infection of these cells, the total cellular RNA preparation (including H4 RNA, and Borrelia RNA) was enriched for prokaryotic RNA, which concentrated the bacterial message, but did not completely eliminate the eukaryotic RNA (data not shown).  Therefore, as a control in our arrays, eukaryotic RNA from the human H4 cells was also purified and hybridized to the array.  To control for Borrelia cell-free gene expression, the data from the experimental conditions (B. burgdorferi infected human cells) was normalized to borrelial expression following growth in BSK and a 20 hour incubation in DMEM tissue culture media.  As with the experimental samples, both controls were assayed in triplicate.

PLATFORM
GPL2129 Affymetrix RML Custom Pathogenic chip 1

CITATIONS
17984208

