TITLE
Characterization of aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 high ovarian cancer cells: Towards targeted stem cell therapy [SKOV3]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Objective: The cancer stem cell (CSC) paradigm hypothesizes that successful clinical eradication of CSCs may lead to durable remission for patients with ovarian cancer.  Despite mounting evidence in support of ovarian CSCs, their phenotype and clinical relevance remain unclear.  We and others have found high aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDHhigh) expression in a variety of normal and malignant stem cells, and sought to better characterize ALDHhigh cells in ovarian cancer.  Methods: We compared ALDHhigh to ALDHlow cells in two ovarian cancer models representing distinct subtypes: FNAR-C1 cells, derived from a spontaneous rat endometrioid carcinoma, and the human SKOV3 cell line (described as both serous and clear cell subtypes).  We assessed these populations for stem cell features then analyzed expression by microarray and qPCR.  Results: ALDHhigh cells displayed CSC properties, including: smaller size, quiescence, regenerating the phenotypic diversity of the cell lines in vitro, lack of contact inhibition, nonadherent growth, multi-drug resistance, and in vivo tumorigenicity.  Microarray and qPCR analysis of the expression of markers reported by others to enrich for ovarian CSCs revealed that ALDHhigh cells of both models showed downregulation of CD24, but inconsistent expression of CD44, KIT and CD133.  However, the following drugable targets were consistently expressed in the ALDHhigh cells from both models: mTOR signaling, her-2/neu, CD47 and FGF18 / FGFR3.  Conclusions: Based on functional characterization, ALDHhigh ovarian cancer cells represent an ovarian CSC population.  Differential gene expression identified drugable targets that have the potential for therapeutic efficacy against ovarian CSCs from multiple subtypes.

DESIGN
SKOV3 human ovarian cancer cells were sorted into Aldefluor high and Aldefluor low populations.  Analysis was performed in triplicate.  Aldefluor low cells served as the reference cells for fold-change analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
27017984

