TITLE
Identification of JA/COI1-regulated genes in tomato reproductive tissue and JA-treated roots.

ORGANISM
Solanum lycopersicum

SUMMARY
Jasmonic acid (JA) is a fatty-acid derived signaling molecule that regulates a wide variety of plant developmental and stress-related responses. We identified a jasmonate-insensitive1 (jai1) mutant of tomato that is defective in the LeCOI1 gene, which plays an essential role in induced resistance of tomato to a broad spectrum of pests, and is also required for maternal control of seed and fruit development.  The present study is aimed at identifying genes involved in two JA-signaled processes that have not been studied in other plants. The first specific aim is to identify the set of JA/COI1-regulated genes in tomato reproductive tissues, with emphasis on genes expressed in maternal tissues. We hypothesize that JA/COI1 signaling regulates maternal processes that nurture the developing embryo and seed. The second aim of the study is to identify JA/COI1-regulated genes that are specifically expressed in tomato roots. Although it has been shown that JA promotes root defenses against various pests, virtually nothing is known about the JA-regulated transcriptome in roots.  Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) cv Micro-Tom wild-type and jai1 seed were grown in peat pots and maintained in growth chambers. To identify COI1-regulated genes in reproductive tissues, flower buds, open flowers and immature fruit at 7 and 17 days post-pollination were collected from 8 to 10 week old plants. To identify COI1-regulated genes in roots, 3 week old plants were exposed to exogenous JA by a single soil drench with 0.1mM JA, and roots were collected after 1, 6, 12 and 24 hours. Plants treated with water were used for the 0hr time point. All tissue was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and RNA was extracted and analyzed as described in the TIGR Potato Microarray protocol (phenol method). Three biological replicates were collected for this study. Keywords: Direct comparison

DESIGN
26 hybs total

PLATFORM
GPL1902 Potato 10k cDNA array version 3

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

