TITLE
Investigating H. Influenzae Species Diversity by Comparative Genomic Hybridization

ORGANISM
Haemophilus influenzae

SUMMARY
Haemophilus influenzae(Hi) is a gram-negative rod shaped bacterium that lives symbiotically in the upper respiratory tract of humans. Capsulated Hi, as well as non-capsulated strains are known to cause a number of significant infections. Recognizing and understanding the links between the phenotypic traits and the genetic background has paramount epidemiological and clinical importance. To date, a panoply of microbiological and molecular biology tools have been developed and utilized by researchers aimed at identifying the evolutionary links among strains and isolates. Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) has been shown to be a useful tool for screening strains for their genetic content. However, there is a major limitation when CGH is conducted on a microarray based on a single reference genome. CGH results report which genes are present or absent relative to the genome. Hence the information about novel genetic content that the query strain possesses remains obscure. We report here the construction of the first Hi pan-genome microarray representing ca. 4600 features by 70-mers. In addition to those from the Rd strain, new features originate from the unfinished genome sequences present in NCBI database and from our novel gene discovery project efforts using strain HK1212. Genomes of 20strains belonging to different phylogenetic lineages were screened for their gene loss and gain utilizing the species microarray.  The results obtained by employing the multistrain species microarray provide comprehensive information about the genomic content of uncharacterized strains. The trees generated by CGH, in general, do not reproduce the phylogeny of a species in terms of vertical evolution, but instead represents the overall relatedness of genomes to one another and provide an assessment about the species genome evolution. Keywords: Comparative Genomic Hybridization

DESIGN
Twenty query strains (denoted HKxxxx) were investigated in this study, with each query strain hybridized against the reference strain, KW20.  Two dye-swap experiments were performed, for a total of four hybridizations per query strain.  Each 70mer oligo spotted on the H. influenzae species microarray is replicated six times.  Positive controls on the array consist of oligos designed from the sequenced reference genome, KW20, and negative controls on the array consist of oligos designed from the thale cress plant, Arabidopsis thaliana.

PLATFORM
GPL5328 JCVI PFGRC Haemophilus influenzae 32K vt1 array designed primarily based on strain HK12 [FULL_FEATURE_LAYOUT]

CITATIONS
20654709

