TITLE
Global Transcriptional Analysis of Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae Following Exposure to Hydrogen Peroxide

ORGANISM
Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae

SUMMARY
Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae, the causative agent of swine enzootic pneumonia, colonizes the cilia of swine lungs, causing ciliostasis and cell death. Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae is a component of the porcine respiratory disease complex (PRDC) and is especially problematic for the finishing swine industry, causing the loss of hundreds of millions of dollars in farm revenues worldwide. For successful infection, M. hyopneumoniae must effectively resist oxidative stresses due to the release of oxidative compounds from neutrophils and macrophages during the host’s immune response. However, the mechanism M. hyopneumoniae uses to avert the host response is still unclear. To gain a better understanding of the transcriptional responses of M. hyopneumoniae under oxidative stress, cultures were grown to early exponential phase and exposed to 0.5% percent hydrogen peroxide for 15 minutes. RNA samples from these cultures were collected and compared to RNA samples from control cultures using two-color PCR-based M. hyopneumoniae microarrays. This study revealed significant down-regulation of important glycolytic pathway genes and gene transcription proteins, as well as a protein known to activate oxidative stressor cascades in neutrophils. This study has also contained significantly differentially expressed genes common to other environmental stress responses, and merits further study of universal stress response genes of M. hyopneumoniae. Keywords: Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae, RNA microarray

DESIGN
Six independent RNA samples from hydrogen peroxide-exposed cultures were paired with six independent RNA samples from control cultures for hybridization to six two-color microarrays. For three arrays, the control RNA sample was labeled with Cy3 dye and the experimental RNA sample was labeled with Cy5 dye, the dyes were reversed for the other three arrays to account for any possible dye bias.

PLATFORM
GPL5372 Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae spotted PCR array

CITATIONS
17975087

