TITLE
Ebola-infected non-human primates - PBMCs

ORGANISM
Macaca fascicularis ; Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Infection with Ebola virus (EBOV) causes a fulminant and often fatal hemorrhagic fever.  In order to improve our understanding of EBOV pathogenesis and EBOV-host interactions we have examined the molecular features of EBOV infection in vivo.   Using self-spotted cDNA microarrays, we analyzed genome-wide host expression patterns in sequential blood samples from nonhuman primates (NHP) infected with EBOV. A reference experiement design type is where all samples are compared to a common reference. Keywords: reference_design

DESIGN
Ebola infection of non-human primates (cynomolgus macaques).  We took sequential samples of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from 15 cynomolgus macaques infected intramuscularly with 1000 plaque forming units (PFUs) of EBOV, Zaire strain. Peripheral blood samples (2.5mL) were collected on days 1, 4, or 6 prior to infection, in order to define a robust baseline, and then on successive days after infection, until death (immediately prior to euthanasia).  Animals were euthanized at days 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 postinfection.  PBMC's were collected at days post-infection as noted, preserved in Trizol, Trizol-extracted total RNA, 1 round amplified (Ambion MessageAmp I), directly labeled by Cy5 incorporation during reverse transcription of amplified RNA. Each blood sample was hybridized versus a common reference.  The same reference is used for all samples - Stratagene Universal Human Reference RNA, 1 round of amplification (Ambion MessageAmp I), directly labeled by Cy3 incorporation during reverse transcription of amplified reference RNA.  Two to three biological replicates of pre-infection samples were taken for each animal, as well as two to nine biological replicates (from different animals) at each day post-infection.  A total of 50 arrays, representing 15 animals is included in this dataset. Using regression correlation

PLATFORM
GPL5447 LC-44

CITATIONS
17725815

