TITLE
Vitamin D3 affects TNFa mediated activation of dendritic cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The ability of dendritic cells (DC) to initiate immunity and induce antigen-specific tolerance makes DC ideal targets for pharmacological intervention into immune responses. NF-kB factors are a family of transcriptional regulators important for DC development and function. However, the identity of NF-kB target genes that are central to DC biology is largely unknown. In the present study inhibition of the NF-kB activation by the IkBa super repressor (IkBa-SR) and DNA microarray analysis were used to determine the repertoire of NF-kB responsive genes in DC. A number of immunomodulatory compounds have been suggested to target the NF-kB signalling pathway and/or NF-kB-mediated transcription of pro-inflammatory target genes. 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (VD3) exerts its effects through the vitamin D3 receptor (VDR), a member of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily. Microarray analysis was also selected as an approach of choice for the analysis of the effects of VD3 on the activation of DC, and to survey the involvement of VDR in repression of NF-kB regulated genes. These genes can be potentially useful targets for the development of more specific anti-inflammatory agents for clinical applications. Keywords: drug treatment, TNFa treatment, VD3 treatment

DESIGN
DC were generated in vitro from bone marrow cells of VDRmut and VDRwt control mice as described previously (Hieronymus, T., T. C. Gust, R. D. Kirsch, T. Jorgas, G. Blendinger, M. Goncharenko, K. Supplitt, S. Rose-John, A. M. Muller, and M. Zenke. 2005. Progressive and controlled development of mouse dendritic cells from Flt3+CD11b+ progenitors in vitro. J Immunol 174:2552-2562). Immature DC were pre-treated with 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (VD3), or left untreated. TNFa was added where appropriate, and cells incubated further for 4 h. Total RNA was amplified, labelled and hybridised to Affymetrix MOE430A arrays. TNFa up- and down-regulated genes, as well as genes affected by VD3 were analysed.

PLATFORM
GPL339 [MOE430A] Affymetrix Mouse Expression 430A Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

