TITLE
caArray_orkin-0038: Identification of distinct molecular phenotypes in acute megakaryoblastic leukemia by gene expression profiling

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Individuals with Down syndrome (DS) are predisposed to develop acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL), characterized by expression of truncated GATA1 transcription factor protein (GATA1s) due to somatic mutation. The treatment outcome for DS-AMKL is more favorable than for AMKL in non-DS patients. To gain insight into gene expression differences in AMKL, we compared 24 DS and 39 non-DS AMKL samples. We found that non-DS-AMKL samples cluster in two groups, characterized by differences in expression of HOX/TALE family members. Both of these groups are distinct from DS-AMKL, independent of chromosome 21 gene expression. To explore alterations of the GATA1 transcriptome, we used cross-species comparison with genes regulated by GATA1 expression in murine erythroid precursors. Genes repressed after GATA1 induction in the murine system, most notably GATA-2, MYC, and KIT, show increased expression in DS-AMKL, suggesting that GATA1s fail to repress this class of genes. Only a subset of genes that are up-regulated upon GATA1 induction in the murine system show increased expression in DS-AMKL, including GATA1 and BACH1, a probable negative regulator of megakaryocytic differentiation located on chromosome 21. Surprisingly, expression of the chromosome 21 gene RUNX1, a known regulator of megakaryopoiesis, was not elevated in DS-AMKL. Our results identify relevant signatures for distinct AMKL entities and provide insight into gene expression changes associated with these related leukemias.

DESIGN
orkin-00383 Assay Type: Gene Expression Provider: Affymetrix Array Designs: HG-U133A Organism: Homo sapiens (ncbitax) Tissue Sites: Material Types: total_RNA, synthetic_RNA, organism_part, whole_organism Disease States: Down Syndrome; Transient Myeloproliferative Disorder, non Down Syndrome; Acute Megakaryoblastic Leukemia, Down Syndrome; Acute Megakaryoblastic Leukemia, non Down Syndrome; Acute Myeloid Leukemia, Down Syndrome; Acute Myeloid Leukemia

PLATFORM
GPL96 [HG-U133A] Affymetrix Human Genome U133A Array

CITATIONS
16492768

