TITLE
Defining the mechanisms and consequences of glycolytic metabolism in human pluripotent stem cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The balance between glycolytic and oxidative metabolism shifts during differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and during reprogramming of somatic cells into pluripotent stem cells.  However the contribution of glycolytic metabolism to various stages of pluripotency is not well understood.  Additionally, few tools have been developed that modulate pluripotent stem cell glycolytic metabolism to influence self-renewal or differentiation.  Here we show that the degree of human pluripotency is associated with glycolytic rate, whereby naive hESCs exhibit higher glycolytic flux, increased MYC transcriptional activity, and elevated nuclear N-MYC levels relative to primed hESCs.  Consistently, the inner cell mass of human blastocysts also exhibits increased MYC transcriptional activity relative to primed hESCs and elevated nuclear N-MYC levels.  Expression of the lactate transporter, monocarboxylate transporter 1 (MCT1), is strongly associated with the pluripotent state, and reduction of glycolysis using a small molecule inhibitor towards MCT1 decreases self-renewal of naïve hESCs and feeder-free cultured primed hESCs, but not that of primed hESCs grown in feeder-supported conditions.  Lastly, reduction of glycolytic metabolism via MCT1 inhibition in feeder-free primed hESCs enhances neural lineage specification.  These findings validate the association between glycolytic metabolism and pluripotency, reveal differences in the glucose metabolism of feeder- versus feeder-free cultured hESCs, and show that pharmacologic regulation of glycolysis can influence self-renewal and initial cell fate specification of human pluripotent stem cells.

DESIGN
We hypothesized that human pluripotent stem cells, cultured with or without feeder cells (Mouse Embryonic Fibroblasts, or MEFs), might display different metabolic phenotyes, and secreted factors by MEFs might be responsible for reprogramming the metabolism of human pluripotent stem cells.  To test these hypotheses, we generated whole genome microarray data from human embryonic stem cell lines, with or without feeders, and feeder-free hESCs treated for 24 hours with MEF-conditioned or unconditioned medium. In addition, to understand how glycolysis inhibition changes the gene expression of human pluripotent cells, our study also included human embryonic stem cells treated for five days with DMSO or 250 nM AZD3965, a small molecule inhibitor towards monocarboxylate transport 1, or MCT1.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
27618217

