TITLE
Identification of ice plant (Mesembryanthemum crystallinum L.) microRNAs using RNA-Seq and analysis of the response to high salinity at seedling stage

ORGANISM
Mesembryanthemum crystallinum

SUMMARY
Background:   The halophyte Mesembryanthemum crystallinum (ice plant) is a model for studying salt tolerance. The morphology, physiology, metabolism, and gene expression of ice plant have been studied for over 40 years. Although the complete genome sequence has not been revealed, large-scale analyses of gene expression profiling have drawn an outline of salt tolerance in ice plant. Despite ample information in the transcriptome, miRNA information has not been documented. Results:   We examined responses to a sudden increase in salinity in ice plant seedlings. Using a fluorescent dye to detect Na+, we found that ice plant roots respond to an increased flux of Na+ by either secreting or storing Na+ in specialized cells. High-throughput sequencing was used to identify small RNA profiles in three-day-old seedlings treated with or without 200 mM NaCl. Totally 132 conserved miRNAs belonging to 22 families were found. The hairpin precursor of 19 conserved mcr-miRNAs and 12 novel mcr-miRNAs were identified. Target genes are involved in a broad range of biological processes: transcription factors that regulate growth and development, enzymes that catalyze miRNA biogenesis for the most conserved mcr-miRNA, and proteins that are involved in ion homeostasis and drought-stress responses for some novel mcr-miRNAs. After 6 h of salt stress, the expressions of most mcr-miRNAs were down-regulated, whereas the expressions of their corresponding target genes were up-regulated. Analyses of the functions of target genes revealed that cellular processes, including growth and development, metabolism, and ion transport activity were up-regulated in roots under salt stress. Conclusions:   Analyses of small RNA profile of ice plant seedlings identified many conserved miRNA families and several novel miRNAs. The expression of ten conserved miRNAs and three novel miRNAs were reciprocally correlated to predicted targets hourly after salt stress. Based on the expression pattern of miRNA and target genes in combination with the observation of Na+ distribution, we suggest that ice plant roots respond effectively to increased salinity by using Na+ as an osmoticum for cell expansion and guard cell opening. Excessive Na+ could either be secreted through root epidermis or stored in specialized leaf epidermal cells. These responses are partially regulated at the miRNA-mediated post-transcriptional level.

DESIGN
miRNA profile of three-day-old dark-grown ice plant seedlings (control) or 200 mM NaCl (salt) treated for 6 h.

PLATFORM
GPL22060 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mesembryanthemum crystallinum)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

