TITLE
Contribution of Poly-unsaturated Fatty Acids on Cerebral Neurobiology: An Integrated Omics Approach with Epigenomic Focus [expression]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The epigenetic landscape is vulnerable to variations in diet. Here, we investigated the influence of different PUFA dietary supplements on rodents’ nervous system development and functions and potential consequences for neurodegenerative disorders. We have previously studied the genomic plasticity of these biofunctions in mice fed on high n-3 PUFA enriched diet (ERD). In conjunction, in the present study, we introduced a second equicaloric diet with n-3 PUFA optimally balanced by n-6 PUFA (BLD). The typical lab diet with high n-6 PUFA was the baseline.  Randomly grouped C57BL/6j mice were fed on any of these three diets from their neonatal age to late adolescent. Post-euthanasia, the transcriptomic landscape of hemibrains was investigated in parallel for two epigenetic mechanisms, namely the miRNA profile and DNA methylation. Integrating data we focused on those genes which had both hypermethylated CpG islands and silenced transcripts. Of these, 308 and 131 genes were perturbed by ERD and BLD, respectively, in comparison to the baseline. Also, miRNA:mRNA pairs were screened to identify those overexpressed miRNAs that silenced gene transcription. There were 18 and 39 miRNAs that met the cutoff in ERD- and BLD-fed mice, respectively. The majority of miRNAs overexpressed by BLD are associated with Alzheimer’s and schizophrenia. BLD allowed hypermethylation of those genes that enriched the networks associated with calcium-releasing neurotransmitters. Downstream networks leading to LTP, memory, cognition and learning were perturbed in sync. ERD permitted hypermethylation of genes that enrich the cytoskeletal development network and promote the formation of neuronal precursors. We present the conclusions taking into full account the limited knowledge regarding the epigenetic influence on biofunctions.  Since this study has single time point, we could not verify if these functional attributes are the cause or the consequences of epigenetic plasticity. Hence, a more comprehensive study in this regard is essential.

DESIGN
A N-3 PUFA-enriched diet (ERD, n3:n6= 7:1) and a balanced diet (BLD, n3:n6= 1:1) were customized to contain equivalent caloric content as that of the standard lab diet (STD, n3:n6= 1:6). These diets were administered to three groups of C57BL/6j male mice from their weaning age until late adolescence. Left hemibrains were analyzed for differential transcripts, DNA methylation and microRNAs.

PLATFORM
GPL13912 Agilent-028005 SurePrint G3 Mouse GE 8x60K Microarray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

