TITLE
Hepatic transcriptomic changes during non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)-associated liver carcinogenesis in mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which accounts for 90% of all primary livers tumors, is the fourth most common cancer in the world.  The development of HCC is a long-term and complex process, and uncovering the molecular mechanisms associated with HCC development is critical for the disease diagnosis, prevention, and treatment.  Exploring these mechanisms using human HCC samples is desirable, but frequently impractical, with a number of limitations and shortcomings.  The STAMTM (Stelic Institute & Co, Tokyo, Japan) mouse model of NASH-associated liver carcinogenesis is considered a useful and relevant model for investigating the molecular pathogenesis of NASH-derived HCC. This model resembles the human HCC development associated with progression from simple steatosis to NASH, fibrosis, and HCC.  In the present study, by using high-throughput whole genome microarrays (SurePrint G3 Mouse Gene Expression v2, 8x60K; Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA), we examined the transcriptomic profiles in the livers of STAMTM mice at different stages of liver carcinogenesis, including steatosis (6 week time interval), NASH (8 weeks), fibrotic stage (12 weeks), and in full-fledged HCC (20 weeks).  The results of microarray analyses showed significant progressive changes in hepatic gene expression during the development of HCC.  A total of 970, 1462, 2742, and 2857 of differentially expressed genes were identified in the livers at 6, 8, 12, and 20 weeks, respectively.  Detailed analysis of these differentially expressed genes will benefit the understanding of the underlying mechanisms of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease-derived HCC.

DESIGN
Transcriptomic profile in the liver of STAM mice at 6 weeks (steatosis; n=3), 8 weeks (steatohepatitis; n=3) 12 weeks (fibrosis; n=4) and 20 weeks (HCC-stage tumor tissue, n=4) weeks. Age-matched control samples were also analyzed.

PLATFORM
GPL21810 Agilent-074809 SurePrint G3 Mouse GE v2 8x60K Microarray [Feature Number version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

