TITLE
Chromatin remodeler Fun30-Fft3 disassembles nucleosomes to facilitate RNAPII elongation in fission yeast

ORGANISM
Schizosaccharomyces pombe

SUMMARY
Purpose: The ultimate goal of this study is the identification of transcription elongation-related chromatin remodeler and its in vivo mechanism in fission yeast through Next-generation sequencing (NGS) based ChIP-seq technique. Methods: Every ChIP-seq cells were grown up to mid-log phase and harvested after final 1% formaldehyde fixation and 125mM glycine quencing. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4 Celcius degrees and the cell pellets were washed by 15mL of pH7.5 TBS buffer per a conical tube. ChIP cells were disrupted by glass bead vortexing in ChIP  lysis buffer and sonicated by Sonic Dismembrator Model 500, Fisher Scientific. Debris of the sonicate was excluded by centrifugation by 14,800rpm at 4 Celcius degree. IP samples were aliqouted from the sonicate and immunoprecipiated by proper amount of antibody and protein A/G beads, washed by ChIP  lysis buffer for over-night at 4 Celcius degrees. IP samples were washed and eluted by proper buffers in  Sigmaprep spin column. Proteins in both IP and input samples were degraded by 2hr 30ug proteinase K rxn and de-crosslinked at 65 Celcius degrees for at least 8hrs. The IP and input DNA were eluted by Quiagen PCR purification kit. Results: RNAPII and factor ChIP-seq in various mutants of chromatin remodelers showed that FUN30 family promotes transcription at gene coding regions. RNAPII ChIP-seq in fft3Δ, spt16-1 and fft3Δspt16-1 demonstrated that RNAPII regulation function of Fft3 is largely overlapped with that of Spt16. Histone H3 ChIP-seq results in  fft3Δ and spt16-18 demonstrated that Fft3 is major chromatin remodeler to promote nucleosome turnover through nucleosome disassembly. Finally, histone H3 and RNAPII ChIP-seq in fft3Δ, H3/H4DD and  fft3Δ H3/H4DD were showed that Fft3 facilitates RNAPII elongation at ORF regions through nucleosome barrier regulation. Conclusions: Fun30-Fft3 is major chromatin remodeler to facilitate RNAPII elongation by nucleosome disassembly-driven nucleosome barrier alleviation in fission yeast.

DESIGN
ChIP-seq samples of phosphorylated at Ser2 of CTD or unphosphorylated at CTD of RNAPII, chromatin-associated factors and histone H3 in various fission yeast mutants

PLATFORM
GPL17225 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Schizosaccharomyces pombe)

CITATIONS
28218250

