TITLE
To russet or not to russet: MdMyb93 as a regulator of suberin deposition in apple fruits

ORGANISM
Nicotiana benthamiana

SUMMARY
• A comparison of the transcriptomes of russeted vs. waxy apple exocarps previously highlighted a tight relationship between a gene encoding a MYB-type transcription factor, MdMYB93, and some key suberin biosynthetic genes. The present work assesses the role of this transcription factor in the suberization process.  • A phylogenetic analysis of MdMYB93 and Arabidopsis thaliana MYBs was performed and the function of MdMYB93 was further investigated using Agrobacterium-mediated transient overexpression in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves. An RNA-Seq analysis was performed to highlight the MdMYB93-regulated genes. UPLC-TripleTOF and GC-MS were used to investigate alterations in phenylpropanoid, soluble free lipid, and lipid polyester contents.  • A massive accumulation of suberin and its biosynthetic precursors in MdMYB93 agro-infiltrated leaves was accompanied by a remobilization of phenylpropanoids and an increased amount of lignin precursors. Gene expression profiling displayed a concomitant alteration of lipid and phenylpropanoid metabolism, cell wall development, and extracellular transport, with a large number of induced transcripts predicted to be involved in suberin deposition.  • The present work supports a major role of MdMYB93 in the regulation of suberin deposition in russeted apple skins, from the synthesis of monomeric precursors, their transport, polymerization, and final deposition as suberin in primary cell wall.

DESIGN
In order to draw a consistent picture of a gene expression profile of the MYB93 induced was performed comparing of 4 biological replicates of Nicotiana benthamiana leaves infiltrated with Pearleygate103 35S::MdMYB93 and 4 biological replicates of control plants infiltrated with P19 only.

PLATFORM
GPL22072 Illumina MiSeq (Nicotiana benthamiana)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

