TITLE
Combined transcriptional profiling during systemic candidiasis reveals organ-specific host-pathogen interactions [mouse tissues 8 h]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The opportunistic fungal pathogen Candida albicans is a common cause of life-threatening nosocomial bloodstream infections. In the murine model of systemic candidiasis the kidney is the primary target organ while the fungal load declines over time in liver and spleen. To get a better understanding of the organ-specific differences in host-pathogen interaction during systemic murine candidiasis, we performed a time-course gene expression profiling to investigate the differential responses of murine kidney, liver and spleen and determined the fungal transcriptome in liver and kidney. We clearly demonstrate a delayed immune response on the transcriptional level in kidney accompanied by late induction of fungal stress response genes in this organ. In contrast, early upregulation of the proinflammatory response in the liver was associated with a fungal transcriptional profile resembling that of phagocytosed cells, suggesting that the resident phagocytic system contributes significantly to fungal control in the liver. Although no visible filamentation occurred in the liver, C. albicans hypha-associated genes were upregulated, indicating an uncoupling of gene expression and morphology during infection of this organ. In vitro the induction of hypha-associated gene expression in yeast cells led to altered interaction with macrophages, suggesting that the observed transcriptional changes affect host-pathogen interaction in vivo. Consistently, the combination of host and pathogen transcriptional data in an inference network model implied that C. albicans cell wall remodeling and metabolism were connected to the immune responses in kidney and liver. Furthermore, the network suggested links between fungal iron acquisition and amino acid metabolism in the kidney and host organ homeostasis. Thus, this work provides novel insights into the organ-specific host-pathogen interactions during systemic C. albicans infection.

DESIGN
66 mouse samples, 9 arrays, time points: 8h post infection with Candida albicans

PLATFORM
GPL6887 Illumina MouseWG-6 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
27808111

