TITLE
DNA methylation on type-specific human skeletal muscle fibers

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Purpose: Reduced Representation Bisulfite Sequencing (RRBS) DNA input requirements become a challenge when working with small pools of tissue-specific cell types. We describe an application of the RRBS method to assess DNA methylation on low-DNA input from human slow-twitch (MHC I) and fast-twitch (MHC IIa) skeletal muscle fibers. Methods : Fiber-type specific (MHC I and MHC IIa muscle fibers) total DNA was extracted from vastus lateralis muscle biopsies of 8 young physically active men (~25 yrs). A total of 16 DNA samples were generated : 8 DNA samples from pure MHC I and 8 DNA samples from pure MHC IIa muscle fibers. An equal quantity of DNA (4 ng) from each sample was combined to generate a " pooled " DNA sample representing all 8  subjects for each fiber type. Two fiber-type specific " pooled " samples of 32 ng of DNA were generated for library construction and sequencing, creating a Type 1 (MHC I muscle fibers) and Type 2a (MHC IIa muscle fibers) sample. Sequencing was performed using the HiSeq 2500 (Illumina) with 50 bp paired-end read parameters. Minimum sequencing read coverage of 5 (5x) was used as the cutoff for CpG-sites inclusion in the DNA methylation analysis. Fisher’s exact test was performed on CpG-sites that overlapped (i.e. identified in both samples) Type 1 and Type 2a samples to obtain p-values that indicate the likelihood of the site being a differentially methylated CpG-site (DMS). DMS with p < 0.05 were classified as hypermethylated or hypomethylated if they were more or less methylated than the Type 1 sample, which was used as the reference sample. Results: The 32 ng of DNA from fiber-type specific muscle samples  (Type 1 and 2a) used in this study ensured similar sequencing quality as compared to other studies using greater DNA input ( > 50 ng). Mapping ratios of ~47% and  bisulfite conversion rates of ~97-98% were obtained.The unique and best alignment was successfully assessed for each of 17,376,728 CpG-sites in the Type 1 sample and 17,006,993 in the Type 2a sample, which represents ~30% of the total CpG number  in the human genome. We identified 143,160 differentially methylated CpG-sites (DMS) across 14,046 genes among MHC I and MHC IIa muscle fibers.  The analysis revealed that some genes predominantly expressed in MHC I were hypermethylated in MHC IIa muscle fibers. Conclusion: This study validates a low-DNA input RRBS method for human skeletal muscle samples to investigate the methylation patterns at a fiber-type specific level. These are the first fiber-type specific methylation data reported from human skeletal muscle. Considering the metabolic and structural differences between MHC I and MHC IIa muscle fibers, this technique could provide novel insights into the skeletal muscle methylation profile in relation to health, performance, disease or disuse.

DESIGN
Comparison of DNA methylation profiles in slow-twitch (MHC I) and fast-twitch (MHC IIa) human skeletal muscle fibers.

