TITLE
Identification of a unique gene expression signature in mercury and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin co-exposed cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Mercury (Hg) and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) are major environmental contaminants that commonly co-occur in the environment. Both Hg and TCDD are associated with a number of human diseases including cancers. While the individual toxicological effects of Hg and TCDD have been extensively investigated, studies on co-exposure are limited to a few genes and pathways. Therefore, a significant knowledge gap exists in the understanding of the deleterious effects of co-exposure to Hg and TCDD. Due to the prevalence of Hg and TCDD co-contamination in the environment and the major human health hazards they pose, it is important to obtain a fuller understanding of genome-wide effects of Hg and TCDD co-exposure. In this study, by performing a comprehensive transcriptomic analysis of human bronchial epithelial cells (BEAS-2B) exposed to Hg and TCDD individually and in combination, we have uncovered a subset of genes with altered expression only in the co-exposed cells. We also identified the additive as well as antagonistic effects of Hg and TCDD on gene expression. Moreover, we found that co-exposure impacted several biological and disease processes not affected by Hg or TCDD individually. Our studies show that the consequences of Hg and TCDD co-exposure on the transcriptional program and biological processes could be substantially different from single exposures, thus providing new insights into the co-exposure-specific pathogenic processes.

DESIGN
Methods: we performed a comprehensive analysis of the transcriptomes of cells exposed to Hg or TCDD individually and in combination. RNA Seq gene expression comparison done in replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL16791 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
Lakshmanan Jagannathan, Cynthia C. Jose, Vinay Singh Tanwar, Sudin Bhattacharyab and Suresh Cuddapah. Identification of a unique gene expression signature in mercury and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin co-exposed cells. Toxicol Res 2017. DOI: 10.1039/C6TX00432F

