TITLE
Patients With Proneural Glioblastoma May Derive Overall Survival Benefit From the Addition of Bevacizumab to First-Line Radiotherapy and Temozolomide: Retrospective Analysis of the AVAglio Trial

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The AVAglio and RTOG-0825 randomized, placebo-controlled phase III trials in newly diagnosed glioblastoma reported prolonged progression-free survival (PFS), but not overall survival (OS), with the addition of bevacizumab to radiotherapy/temozolomide. To establish whether certain patient subgroups derived OS benefit from the addition of bevacizumab to first-line standard-of-care therapy, AVAglio patients were retrospectively evaluated for molecular subtype, and bevacizumab efficacy assessed for each patient subgroup. A multivariate analysis accounting for prognostic covariates revealed that bevacizumab conferred a significant OS advantage versus placebo for patients with Proneural IDH1 wild-type tumors (17.1 v 12.8 months, respectively; hazard ratio, 0.43; 95% CI, 0.26 to 0.73; P = .002). This analysis also revealed an interaction between the Proneural subtype biomarker and treatment arm (P = .023). The group of patients with Mesenchymal and Proneural tumors derived a PFS benefit from bevacizumab, compared with placebo; however, this translated to an OS benefit in the Proneural subset only. Retrospective analysis of AVAglio data suggests that patients with IDH1 wild-type Proneural glioblastoma may derive OS benefit from first-line bevacizumab treatment. The predictive value of the Proneural subtype observed in AVAglio should be validated in an independent dataset.

DESIGN
A total of 349 (bevacizumab arm, n = 171; placebo arm, n = 178) pretreatment specimens from AVAglio patients (total n = 921) were available for biomarker analysis. Samples were profiled for gene expression and isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) mutation status and classified into previously identified molecular subtypes. PFS and OS were assessed within each subtype.

PLATFORM
GPL22111 Genentech glioblastoma custom panel GBM_GNE_C1954

CITATIONS
26124478

