TITLE
Defining memory-like CD8 T cells that respond to PD-1 therapy in chronic viral infection

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Chronic viral infections are characterized by a state of CD8 T cell dysfunction termed exhaustion. A better understanding of the mechanisms that regulate CD8 T cell responses during chronic infection is required to improve immunotherapies that restore function in exhausted CD8 T cells. Here we identify a novel population of virus-specific CD8 T cells with a T follicular helper (Tfh)-like signature in mice chronically infected with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). These Tfh-like CD8 T cells expressed the programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) inhibitory receptor but at the same time also expressed co-stimulatory molecules and had a gene signature that was related to CD8 T cell memory precursor cells and hematopoietic stem cells (HSC). These Tfh-like CD8 T cells acted as stem cells during chronic infection undergoing self-renewal and also differentiating into the terminally exhausted CD8 T cells that were present in both lymphoid and non-lymphoid tissues. The Tfh-like CD8 T cells were found only in lymphoid tissues and resided predominantly in the T cell zones along with naïve CD8 T cells. Interestingly, the proliferative burst after PD-1 blockade came almost exclusively from this Tfh-like CD8 T cell subset. Importantly, the transcription factor TCF1 played a cell intrinsic and essential role in the generation of Tfh-like CD8 T cells. Taken together, our study identifies Tfh-like CD8 T cells as the critical subset for maintaining the pool of virus-specific CD8 T cells during chronic infection and as the cells that proliferate after PD-1 blockade. These findings provide a better understanding of T cell exhaustion and have implications towards optimizing PD-1 directed immunotherapy.

DESIGN
8 samples isolated from CD8 T-cells in LCMV clone 13 GK1.5 infected mice (2 naïve, 3 CXCR5+Tim3-, 3 CXCR5-Tim3+) cells were analyzed

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
27501248

