TITLE
Pak1-ATF2 signaling axis induces miR-132 to inhibit hematogenous metastasis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Pak1 as a serine/threonine kinase, has been implicated in cytoskeletal remodelling, cell motility, apoptosis and transformation. Pak1 plays important roles in multiple signal pathways. Pak1 protects cells from apoptosis through at least three different pathways including forkhead box O1 (FOXO1), B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) and DLC1. Pak1 also regulates activity of Raf and Aurora kinases to affect cellular proliferation. Overexpression of Pak1 is involved in the regulation of actin assembly and disassembly through phosphorylations of LIM Kinase and cytoskeletal associated proteins such as Filamin A, Paxillin, Caldesmon, Cortactin and Arp2/3. Pak1 also regulates microtubule dynamics via activation of tubulin cofactor B (TCoB) and DLC1, and inhibition of stathmin. In spite of a large body of work about the mechanism of Pak1 action in cancer, it remains unknown whether Pak1 signaling could potentially regulate the biology of regulatory miRNAs. This is particularly relevant for gastric cancer because Pak1 can activate many regulators of miRNAs expression in gastric cancer cells including NF-kappaB and ERK, and Pak1 signaling has profound phenotypic effects on the biology of gastric cancer cells. We constructed Pak1 knockdown stable cell lines. The stable Pak1 knockdown gastric cancer BGC823 cells and control cells were performed miRNA chip analysis by CapitalBio company.

DESIGN
Gastric cancer BGC823 cells with stable Pak1 knockdown and BGC-823 gastric cancer cells  transfected with U6 were used in this experiment. Total RNA was extracted  by trizol,Here we use a Capitalbio mammal microRNA V3.0(CapitalBio, Beijing, China) containing 509 well-characterized human, mouse and rat miRNAs and various controls to profile the expression levels of miRNA in 16 and conU6 group.three chip were test in each group, and the procedure was repeated twice.

PLATFORM
GPL8469 Capitalbio mammal microRNA V3.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

