TITLE
Micro-RNAs levels in wildtype vs. Ahr-null adult mouse liver constitutively and in response to doxin treatment.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Dioxin-like chemicals are well-known for their ability to upregulate expression of numerous genes via the AH receptor (AHR).  However, recent transcriptomic analyses in several laboratories indicate that dioxin-like chemicals or AHR genotype itself also can downregulate levels of mRNAs encoded by numerous genes.  The mechanism responsible for such downregulation is unknown.  We hypothesized that microRNAs (miRNAs), which have emerged as powerful negative regulators of mRNA levels in several systems, might be responsible for mRNA downregulation in dioxin/AHR pathways. We conducted a thorough investigation to address the following questions: (1) does AHR genotype itself affect constitutive expression of microRNAs?  (2) does TCDD affect microRNA levels and, if so, is this response dependent on the AHR?  (3) does TCDD affect microRNA levels differently in animals that are sensitive to dioxin toxicity versus those that are dioxin-resistant? We used the Exiqon miRNA array platform as well as quantitative RT-PCR to measure miRNA levels in wildtype vs. Ahr-null mice. Treatment with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in vivo caused few changes in miRNA levels in mouse livers and those changes that were statistically significant were of modest magnitude.   AHR genotype had little effect on hepatic miRNA levels, either in constitutive expression or in response to TCDD – only a few miRNAs differed in expression between Ahr-null mice compared to mice with wildtype AHR. It is unlikely that mRNA downregulation by dioxins is mediated by miRNAs, nor are miRNAs likely to play a significant role in dioxin toxicity in adult mouse liver. Manuscript Submitted: Moffat ID, Boutros PC, Celius T, Pohjanvirta R & Okey AB. Micro-RNAs in rodent liver are refractory to dioxin treatment. Toxicological Sciences May, 2007. Keywords: miRNA expression, gene knockout, response to xenobiotics, genetic modification

DESIGN
This was a two-factor, two-level design, the factors being genotype Ahr+/+ (WT) or Ahr-/- (KO) and treatment TCDD-treated (T) or vehicle control (C).   Each total-RNA sample was separately labeled either with a Hy3- or a Hy5-fluorophore (Exiqon).  Hy3- and Hy5-labeled samples were co-hybridized to an array. Dye-reversal was performed to eliminate dye bias. We tested 3 TCDD-treated and 3 control mice in the Ahr-/- groups and 4 TCDD-treated and 4 control mice in the Ahr+/+ groups. Technical replication of 1 TCDD-treated and 1 control mice in the Ahr-/- groups was performed.  A loop design was used.

PLATFORM
GPL5531 Exiqon-Rat/Mouse/Human-540-v8.0

CITATIONS
17698510

