TITLE
Resistance Exercise Reverses Aging in Human Skeletal Muscle

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Human aging is associated with skeletal muscle atrophy and functional impairment (sarcopenia). Multiple lines of evidence suggest that mitochondrial dysfunction is a major contributor to sarcopenia. We evaluated whether healthy aging was associated with a transcriptional profile reflecting mitochondrial impairment and whether resistance exercise could reverse this signature to that approximating a younger physiological age. Skeletal muscle biopsies from healthy older (N = 25) and younger (N = 26) adult men and women were compared using gene expression profiling, and a subset of these were related to measurements of muscle strength. 14 of the older adults had muscle samples taken before and after a six-month resistance exercise-training program. Before exercise training, older adults were 59% weaker than younger, but after six months of training in older adults, strength improved significantly (P < 0.001) such that they were only 38% lower than young adults. As a consequence of age, we found 596 genes differentially expressed using a false discovery rate cut-off of 5%. Prior to the exercise training, the transcriptome profile showed a dramatic enrichment of genes associated with mitochondrial function with age. However, following exercise training the transcriptional signature of aging was markedly reversed back to that of younger levels for most genes that were affected by both age and exercise. We conclude that healthy older adults show evidence of mitochondrial impairment and muscle weakness, but that this can be partially reversed at the phenotypic level, and substantially reversed at the transcriptome level, following six months of resistance exercise training. Keywords: resistance exercise, muscle, aging

DESIGN
A muscle biopsy was taken from the vastus lateralis muscle of the right or left leg (randomized) before exercise or immobilization (young people, N = 26 total) and before (N = 25), and after (N = 14), the training period in older adults, ~20 cm proximal to the knee joint using a 5mm Bergström biopsy needle. The muscle was dissected of fat and connective tissue, immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C for subsequent analysis. All subjects were required to abstain from strenuous physical activity for 48 h prior to the muscle biopsy.

PLATFORM
GPL2700 Sentrix HumanRef-8 Expression BeadChip

CITATIONS
17520024

