TITLE
Bcl11b defect in a human severe combined immunodeficiency with multisystem anomalies

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is characterized by arrested T lymphocyte production and B lymphocyte dysfunction, resulting in life-threatening infections. Early diagnosis of SCID through population-based newborn screening (NBS) optimizes clinical management and outcomes, and also permits identification of previously unknown factors essential for human lymphocyte development. Methods: SCID was detected, prior to onset of infections, by NBS of T cell receptor excision circles, a biomarker for thymic output. Upon confirmation, the affected baby was treated by allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT). The genetic cause was sought by exome sequencing of the patient and parents, followed by functional analysis of a prioritized candidate gene using human hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and zebrafish embryos. Results: An infant with leaky SCID, craniofacial and dermal abnormalities, and absent corpus callosum had his immune deficit fully corrected by HCT. Exome sequencing revealed a heterozygous, de novo, missense mutation pN441K in BCL11B. The mutant Bcl11b protein had dominant negative activity, abrogating the ability of wild type Bcl11b to bind DNA, arresting T cell lineage development and disrupting HSC migration, revealing a novel function of Bcl11b. The patient’s defects, recapitulated in Bcl11b-deficient zebrafish, were reversed by ectopic expression of intact, but not mutant, human BCL11B. Conclusions: Newborn screening facilitated treatment and identification of a novel etiology for human SCID. Coupling exome sequencing with candidate gene evaluation in human HSC and in zebrafish revealed that a constitutional BCL11B mutation causes human multisystem anomalies with SCID, while also revealing a novel, pre-thymic role for Bcl11b in hematopoietic progenitors.

DESIGN
3 samples were analyzed in duplicate, Sample 1 was human HSC transduced with GFP only lentivirus which served as controls, Sample 2 was human HSC transduced with lentivirus expressing FLAG-tagged WT BCL11B and GFP, Sample 3 was human HSC transduced with lentivirus expressing FLAG-tagged mutant BCL11B and GFP

