TITLE
ZSCAN5B and its primate-specific paralogs bind RNA polymerase III genes and extra-TFIIIC (ETC) sites to modulate mitotic progression [Human cell line ChIP-Seq data set]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Particularly in the context of differentiation and development, the importance of three-dimensional chromatin architecture to gene regulatory mechanisms is becoming increasingly clear.  The most ancient known mechanism of chromatin organization involves TFIIIC, a transcription factor (TF) that recruits RNA polymerase III (Pol III) for transcription of tRNA and other types of non-coding RNA genes. From yeast to mammals, TFIIIC binds to tRNA genes (tDNAs) and scattered “extra-TFIIIC” (ETC) loci and serves to tether these loci together as anchors of chromatin loops. TFIIIC activities are modulated by MAF, MYC, and other TF proteins that are still unidentified.  Here we identify the ZSCAN5 TF family - including mammalian ZSCAN5B and its primate-specific paralogs - as proteins that occupy mammalian Pol III promoters and ETC sites.  We show that ZSCAN5B binds with high specificity to a conserved subset of tDNA loci and other Pol III genes in human and mouse and that primate-specific ZSCAN5A and ZSCAN5D also bind Pol III genes, although ZSCAN5D preferentially localizes to MIR SINE- and LINE2-associated ETC sites. ZSCAN5 genes are expressed in proliferating cell populations and are cell-cycle regulated, and gene expression data suggested that they might cooperate to regulate basic cellular functions including mitotic progression. Consistent with this predicted role, ZSCAN5A knockdown led to increasing numbers of cells in mitotic cells and aneuploidy in cultured cells. Together these data implicate ZSCAN5 genes in regulation of Pol III gene transcription and nearby Pol II genes, ultimately influencing cell cycle progression and differentiation in a variety of tissues.

DESIGN
Antibodies specific to ZCSAN5A, ZCSAN5B and ZCSAN5D were used in Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments in chromatin from the BeWo choriocarcinoma cells; ZSCAN5B was also used in HEK 293 human embryonic kidney cell lines.  Experiments were done in duplicate and compared to genomic input controls.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
27732952

