TITLE
Alternative splicing at the last coding exon of Cav2.1 regulates the interaction with Cav4 and plays an essential role in preventing a complex neurological disease in mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Alternative splicing (AS) that occurs at the final coding exon (exon 47) of the Cav2.1 voltage-gated calcium channel (VGCC) gene produces two major isoforms in the brain, MPI and MPc. These isoforms differ in their splice acceptor sites; human MPI is translated into a polyglutamine tract associated with spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6), whereas MPc splices to an immediate stop codon, resulting in a shorter cytoplasmic tail. To gain insight into the functional role of the AS in vivo and its relevance in the pathogenesis of SCA6, here we created knockin mice that exclusively express MPc by inserting the splice-site mutation. The resultant Sca6CtmKO/CtmKO mice developed non-progressive neurological phenotypes resembling those of the Cav4 mutant lethargic (lh/lh), featuring reduced locomotor activity, ataxia and absence seizure without significant alterations in the basic properties of the channel. Interactions of Cav2.1 with Cav4 and Rimbp2 were significantly reduced while those with GABAB2 was enhanced in the cerebellum of Sca6CtmKO/CtmKO mice. Treatment with the GABAB antagonist CGP35348 partially rescued the motor impairments seen in Sca6CtmKO/CtmKO mice. These results suggest that the MPI and MPc-type CaV2.1 channels function in unique Cav2 nano-environments and the carboxyl-terminal domain plays an essential role in the prevention of a complex neurological phenotype.

DESIGN
We used MPI 118Q/118Q and CtmKO/CtmKO mice at six weeks old in order to investigate spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6). Statistical analysis of differently expressed genes was performed using the Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma) package in R/Bioconductor.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

