TITLE
RNA sequencing from neural ensembles activated during fear conditioning in the mouse temporal association cortex

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The stable formation of remote fear memories is thought to require neuronal gene induction in cortical ensembles that are activated during learning. However, the set of genes expressed specifically in these activated ensembles is not known; knowledge of such transcriptional profiles may offer insights into the molecular program underlying stable memory formation. Here we use RNA-Seq to identify genes whose expression is enriched in activated cortical ensembles labeled during associative fear learning. We first establish that mouse temporal association cortex (TeA) is required for remote recall of auditory fear memories. We then perform RNA-Seq in TeA neurons that are labeled by the activity reporter Arc-dVenus during learning. We identify 944 genes with enriched expression in Arc-dVenus+ neurons. These genes include markers of L2/3, L5b, and L6 excitatory neurons but not glial or inhibitory markers, confirming Arc-dVenus to be an excitatory neuron-specific, layer non-specific activity reporter. Cross comparisons to other transcriptional profiles show that 125 of the enriched genes are also activity-regulated in vitro or induced by visual stimulus in the visual cortex, suggesting that they may be induced generally in the cortex in an experience-dependent fashion. Prominent among the enriched genes are those encoding potassium channels that down-regulate neuronal activity, suggesting the possibility that part of the molecular program induced by fear conditioning may initiate homeostatic plasticity.

DESIGN
For the RNA sequencing study, the Arc-dVenus transgenic mice were divided into three different groups. One group (FC, n = 3) went through the FC and received 7 CS (10 sec, 6khz pure tone) and US pairing (1 sec, 0.5mA). Another group (Shock, n = 2) received 7 repetitions of US (1-s footshock, 0.5mA DC; inter-trial interval: 20-180s) without any CSs. The bulk-tissue controls included two mice that were shocked without tones, and one mouse that was fear conditioned. All Arc-dVenus transgenic mice were sacrificed 6hrs after the behavioral procedures.

