TITLE
Eradication of Solid Human Tumors in Nude Mice with an Intravenously Injected Light-Emitting Oncolytic Vaccinia Virus

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Previously we reported that a recombinant vaccinia virus (VACV) carrying a light-emitting fusion gene enters, replicates in, and reveals the locations of tumors in mice. A new recombinant VACV, GLV-1h68, as a simultaneous diagnostic and therapeutic agent, was constructed by inserting three expression cassettes (encoding Renilla luciferase-green fluorescent protein (RUC-GFP) fusion, b-galactosidase, and b-glucuronidase) into the F14.5L, J2R (encoding thymidine kinase, TK), and A56R (encoding hemagglutinin, HA) loci of the viral genome, respectively. Intravenous (i.v.) injections of GLV-1h68 (1 × 107 pfu/mouse) into nude mice with established (500 mm3)  subcutaneous (s.c.) GI-101A human breast tumors were used to evaluate its toxicity, tumor targeting specificity and oncolytic efficacy. GLV-1h68 demonstrated an enhanced tumor targeting specificity and much reduced toxicity compared to its parental LIVP strains. The tumors colonized by GLV-1h68 exhibited growth, inhibition, and regression phases followed by tumor eradication within 130 days in 95% of the mice tested. Tumor regression in live animals was monitored in real time based on decreasing light emission, hence demonstrating the concept of a combined oncolytic virus-mediated tumor diagnosis and therapy system. Transcriptional profiling of regressing tumors based on a mouse-specific platform revealed gene expression signatures consistent with immune defense activation, inclusive of interferon stimulated genes (STAT-1 and IRF-7), cytokines, chemokines and innate immune effector function. These findings suggest that immune activation may combine with viral oncolysis to induce tumor eradication in this model, providing a novel perspective for the design of oncolytic viral therapies for human cancers. Objective: To determine the gene expression changes induced by GLV-1h68 vaccinia virus injection in mouse carrying human breast cancer implant and leading to tumor eradication. Methods: Gene expression was analyzed using oligonucleotide microarrays. Responsiveness to vaccina virus injection was assessed by toxicity and survival study, gene expression anaysis and tumor volume change. Result: The tumors colonized by GLV-1h68 exhibited growth, inhibition, and regression phases followed by tumor eradication within 130 days in 95% of the mice tested. Tumor regression in live animals was monitored in real time based on decreasing light emission, hence demonstrating the concept of a combined oncolytic virus-mediated tumor diagnosis and therapy system. Transcriptional profiling of regressing tumors based on a mouse-specific platform revealed gene expression signatures consistent with immune defense activation, inclusive of interferon stimulated genes (STAT-1 and IRF-7), cytokines, chemokines and innate immune effector function. Conclusion: Our findings suggest that immune activation may combine with viral oncolysis to induce tumor eradication in this model, providing a novel perspective for the design of oncolytic viral therapies for human cancers. Keywords: Responsiveness to vaccina virus injection

DESIGN
tumor tissues 3 and 6 weeks post virus injection

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
17942938

