TITLE
Exploring chronic drug effects on microengineered human liver cultures using global gene expression profiling

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Global gene expression profiling is useful for elucidating a drug?s mechanism of action (MOA) on the liver; however, such profiling in rats is not very sensitive for predicting human druginduced liver injury, while de-differentiated monolayers of primary human hepatocytes (PHHs) do not permit chronic drug treatment. In contrast, micropatterned co-cultures (MPCCs) containing PHH colonies and 3T3-J2 fibroblasts maintain a stable liver phenotype for 4-6 weeks. Here, we used MPCCs to test the hypothesis that global gene expression patterns in stable PHHs can be used to distinguish clinical hepatotoxic drugs from their non-liver-toxic analogs and understand the MOA prior to the onset of overt hepatotoxicity. We found that MPCCs treated with the clinical hepatotoxic/non-liver-toxic pair, troglitazone/rosiglitazone, at each drug?s reported and non-toxic Cmax (maximum concentration in human plasma) level for 1, 7, and 14 days displayed a total of 12, 269, and 628 differentially expressed genes, respectively, relative to the vehicle-treated control. Troglitazone modulated > 75% of transcripts across pathways such as fatty acid and drug metabolism, oxidative stress, inflammatory response, and complement/coagulation cascades. Escalating rosiglitazone?s dose to that of troglitazone?s Cmax increased modulated transcripts relative to the lower dose; however, over half the identified transcripts were still exclusively modulated by troglitazone. Lastly, other hepatotoxins (nefazodone, ibufenac, and tolcapone) also induced a greater number of differentially expressed genes in MPCCs than their non-liver-toxic analogs (buspirone, ibuprofen, and entacapone) following 7 days of treatment. In conclusion, MPCCs allow evaluation of time- and dose-dependent gene expression patterns in PHHs treated chronically with analog drugs.

DESIGN
[a] We used Affymetrix microarrays to profile the global gene expression of MPCCs treated with either rosiglitazone or troglitazone relative to DMSO-only controls for 24 hours, 7 days, or 14 days. Global gene expression changes were evaluated as drug-treated conditions against DMSO-only controls. [b] We used Affymetrix microarrays to profile the global gene expression of MPCCs treated with a known hepatotoxin or its non-toxic structural analog relative to a DMSO-only control for 7 days.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Brenton R. Ware, Michael McVay, Wendy Y. Sunada, and Salman R. Khetani. Exploring Chronic Drug Effects on Microengineered Human Liver Cultures Using Global Gene Expression Profiling. Toxicol Sci. 2017. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfx059

