TITLE
Histone Arginine Methylation in Cocaine Action: Essential Role of Src Signaling in the Nucleus Accumbens

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Despite addiction being one of the most prevalent and debilitating disorders worldwide, effective treatments are lacking. Repeated cocaine exposure induces maladaptive transcriptional regulation within the brain’s reward circuitry, such as the nucleus accumbens (NAc), and epigenetic mechanisms, such as histone acetylation or methylation on Lys (K) residues, have been linked to these lasting actions of cocaine. However, in contrast to K methylation, the functional role of histone Arg (R) methylation remains unexplored in addiction models and poorly understood in brain in general. Here we show that protein-R-methyltransferase-6 (PRMT6) and its associated histone mark, asymmetric dimethylation of R2 on histone H3 (H3R2me2a), are decreased in the NAc of mice and rats after repeated cocaine exposure, as well as in the NAc of cocaine-addicted humans. PRMT6 downregulation occurs selectively in NAc medium spiny neurons expressing dopamine D2 receptors (D2-MSNs) and serves to protect against cocaine-induced addictive-like behavioral abnormalities. Using ChIP-seq, we demonstrate that reduced H3R2me2a binding at gene targets in NAc after repeated cocaine is strongly correlated with increased binding of H3K4me3, and identify Src kinase signaling inhibitor 1 (Srcin1 or p140Cap) as a key gene for these chromatin modifications. Cocaine induction of Srcin1 in NAc, which is associated with reduced Src signaling, decreases cocaine reward, the motivation to self administer cocaine, and cocaine-induced changes in NAc MSN dendritic spines. These results suggest that this suppression of Src signaling in NAc D2-MSNs, via PRMT6 and H3R2me2a downregulation, functions as a homeostatic brake to restrain cocaine action, and provide novel candidates for the development of new treatments for cocaine addiction.

DESIGN
H3R2me2A ChIP-seq of mouse. Cocaine vs Saline, 3 biological replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL17021 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
27506785

