TITLE
Genetic Susceptibility to Diabetic Nephropathy is Related to Pro-inflammatory Pathways

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is a leading cause of ESRD worldwide, but its molecular pathogenesis is not well-defined and there are no specific treatments.   In humans, there is a strong genetic component determining susceptibility to DN.  However, specific genes controlling DN susceptibility in humans have not been identified.  Here we describe a new mouse model, combining type 1 diabetes with activation of the  renin angiotensin system (RAS), which develops robust kidney disease with features resembling human DN:  heavy albuminuria, hypertension and glomerulosclerosis.   Additionally, there is a powerful effect of genetic background regulating susceptibility to nephropathy.  The 129 strain is susceptible to kidney disease, whereas the C57BL/6 strain is resistant.  To examine the molecular basis of this differential susceptibility, we analyzed the glomerular transcriptome of young mice with albuminuria but without detectable alterations in glomerular structure .  We find dramatic difference in regulation of immune and inflammatory pathways with up-regulation of pro-inflammatory pathways in the susceptible (129) strain and coordinate down-regulation in the resistant (C57BL/6) strain, compared to their respective baselines.  Many of these pathways were also up-regulated in a rat model and in humans with DN.  Our studies suggest that genes controlling inflammatory responses, triggered by hyperglycemia and hypertension, may be critical early determinants of susceptibility to DN.

DESIGN
The analysis was carried out on 2 strains of mice (129/SvEv and C57BL/6), each involving 2 genotypes (wild-type and RenTg/Ins2Akita mutations). Four replicates were used for each strain-genotype (with the exception of 129/SvEv wild-type mice, which had 3 replicates).

PLATFORM
GPL8321 [Mouse430A_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430A 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

