TITLE
Microarray Analysis of chemosensitivity in Hypopharyngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma

ORGANISM
synthetic construct

SUMMARY
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the differentially expressed genes and miRNAs related to the chemosensitivity of hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma （HSCC）by microarrays and miRNA arrays.   METHODS: 1. A total number of 21 patients who underwent induction chemotherapy for primary hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (12 patients are sensitive to chemotherapy ,and others are not) were recruited for microarray and miRNA array gene expression analysis  2. Bioinformatics analysis of differentially expressed genes screened by microarrays : The differential gene cluster analysis was applied in biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions by GO database; The differential gene enrichment analysis was applied in signaling pathways by KEGG database, and the differentially expressed and biologically meaningful core genes would be screened.  3. Prediction and analysis of target genes of differentially expressed miRNAs: TargetScan, PITA and microRNAorg methods were used for target gene prediction in GeneSpring 12.5 software, and the intersection of the three methods analysis was considered as significant target genes. Considering the result of microarrays, the intersection of the predicted target genes and the genes screened by microarrays would be analyzed by bioinformatics, which were considered as genes regulated by different miRNAs.  RESULTS: 1. Analyzed by microarrays, there were 1579 genes significantly related to the sensitivity to chemotherapy; Among these 1579genes, 815 showed a higher expression in the tissue from patients who are sensitive to chemotherapy , while 764 presented the contrasting pattern.   2. Analyzed by miRNA arrays, there were 24 genes significantly related to the sensitivity to chemotherapy; Among them, 6 showed a higher expression in the tissue from patients who are sensitive to chemotherapy , while 18 presented the contrasting pattern. TargetScan, PITA and microRNAorg were used for target gene prediction in GeneSpring 12.5 software, and the intersection of the three methods analysis was considered as significant target genes. There were 613 putative target genes corresponding to the 24 significant miRNAs. Among them, six genes(MAPK14, ADCY1, GSTM4, CDC42, JUN, GPX6) were statistically and biologically different related to the sensitivity to chemotherapy. And among the 24 significant miRNAs, miR-193b-3p、miR-211-3p、miR-4253、miR-4496、miR-6738-5p could regulate them.  CONCLUSIONS: The research revealed a gene expression signature of chemosensitivity in hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma by microarrays and miRNA arrays. The result will contribute to the understanding of the molecular basis of hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma and help to improve diagnosis and treatment.

