TITLE
Microarray Analysis of chemosensitivity in Laryngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the differentially expressed genes related to the chemosensitivity of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma （LSCC）by microarrays arrays.   METHODS: 1. A total number of 11 patients who underwent induction chemotherapy for primary hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (7 patients are sensitive to chemotherapy ,and others are not) were recruited for microarray and miRNA array gene expression analysis  2. Bioinformatics analysis of differentially expressed genes screened by microarrays : The differential gene cluster analysis was applied in biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions by GO database; The differential gene enrichment analysis was applied in signaling pathways by KEGG database, and the differentially expressed and biologically meaningful core genes would be screened.  RESULTS: 1. Analyzed by microarrays, there were 1554 genes significantly related to the sensitivity to chemotherapy; Among these 1554genes, 777 showed a higher expression in the tissue from patients who are sensitive to chemotherapy , while 785 presented the contrasting pattern.   CONCLUSIONS: The research revealed a gene expression signature of chemosensitivity in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma by microarrays arrays. The result will contribute to the understanding of the molecular basis of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma and help to improve diagnosis and treatment.

DESIGN
1. A total number of 11 patients who underwent induction chemotherapy for primary hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (7 patients are sensitive to chemotherapy ,and others are not) were recruited for microarray and miRNA array gene expression analysis  2. Bioinformatics analysis of differentially expressed genes screened by microarrays : The differential gene cluster analysis was applied in biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions by GO database; The differential gene enrichment analysis was applied in signaling pathways by KEGG database, and the differentially expressed and biologically meaningful core genes would be screened.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

