TITLE
Transcriptome profile analysis of breast muscle tissues from high or low levels of atmospheric ammonia exposed broilers (Gallus gallus)

ORGANISM
Gallus gallus

SUMMARY
Abstract: Atmospheric ammonia is a common problem in poultry industry. High concentrations of aerial ammonia cause great harm to broilers' health and production. For the consideration of human health, the limit exposure concentration of ammonia in houses is set at 25 ppm. Previous reports have shown that 25 ppm is still detrimental to livestock, especially the gastrointestinal tract and respiratory tract, but the negative relationship between ammonia exposure and the tissue of breast muscle of broilers is still unknown. In the present study, 25 ppm ammonia in poultry houses was found to lower slaughter performance and breast yield. Then, high-throughput RNA sequencing was utilized to identify differentially expressed genes in breast muscle of broiler chickens exposed to high (25 ppm) or low (3 ppm) levels of atmospheric ammonia. The transcriptome analysis showed that 163 genes (fold change ≥ 2 or ≤ 0.5; P-value < 0.05) were differentially expressed between Ammonia25 (treatment group) and Ammonia3 (control group), including 96 down-regulated and 67 up-regulated genes. qRT-PCR analysis validated the transcriptomic results of RNA sequencing. Gene Ontology (GO) functional annotation analysis revealed potential genes, processes and pathways with putative involvement in growth and development inhibition of breast muscle in broilers caused by aerial ammonia exposure. This study facilitates understanding of the genetic architecture of the chicken breast muscle transcriptome, and has identified candidate genes for breast muscle response to atmospheric ammonia exposure.

DESIGN
Breast muscle mRNA profiles of 42-day old Arbor Acres male broilers exposed to 3 ppm (Ammonia3) and 25 ppm (Ammonia25) concentrations of atmospheric ammonia were generated by RNA sequencing, in duplicate, using Illumina HiSeq2000.

PLATFORM
GPL16133 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Gallus gallus)

CITATIONS
27611572

