TITLE
Interleukin-6 mediated signaling in adrenal medullary chromaffin cells

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
Pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) and interleukin-1beta/alpha (IL1beta/alpha) modulate catecholamine secretion, and long-term gene regulation, in chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla. Interleukin-6 (IL6), also released during inflammation, affects transcriptional responses in primary chromaffin cells, and may coordinate immune and autonomic adrenomedullary responses via an autocrine mechanism, as TNFalpha itself strongly induces IL6 expression in chromaffin cells, which in turn express receptors responsive to IL6. We have examined the signaling mechanisms employed by IL6 to affect tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) enzymatic activation, and adrenomedullary gene transcription, in cultured bovine chromaffin cells. IL6 caused acute tyrosine/threonine phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), and serine phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), as do several other first messengers acting on the chromaffin cell, including histamine, nicotine and angiotensin II. IL6 uniquely activated tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3. Consistent with a short-term ERK1/2 activation, IL6 treatment caused prompt regulation of TH phosphorylation, and up-regulation of genes encoding secreted proteins of the adrenal medulla including galanin, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), gastrin releasing peptide (GRP) and parathyroid hormone-like hormone (PTHLH). We further examined the effects of IL6 treatment on the entire bovine chromaffin cell transcriptome. Of 90 genes up-regulated by IL6, only 16 of which are known targets of IL6 in the immune system. The remaining genes likely represent a combination of novel IL6/STAT3 targets, targets of ERK1/2 shared by other first messengers, and, potentially, IL6-dependent genes activated in a secondary cascade via transcription mediated by IL6-induced transcription factors, such as HIF-1alpha. Notably, genes induced by IL6 represent a cohort with a profile that includes both neuroendocrine-specific genes, including several that are activated by G-protein couple receptor (GPCR) signaling pathways initiated by histamine and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP), and some transcripts also activated by cytokines including interferon-alpha (INFalpha and TNFalpha. These results suggest an integrative role for IL6 in overall fine-tuning of the chromaffin cell response to a wide range of physiological and paraphysiological stressors, particularly when immune and endocrine stimuli converge in the adrenal medulla.

DESIGN
Bovine chromaffin cells (BCC) were incubated with no treatment (n=3), IL6 (n=3), human INFalpha (n=3), or histamine (n=3). Triplicate samples were technical repeats.

PLATFORM
GPL2112 [Bovine] Affymetrix Bovine Genome Array

CITATIONS
27770433

