TITLE
Expression data from kidneys of rats with and without cisplatin treatment

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
We investigated  an acute kidney injury (AKI) model in rats induced by cisplatin (Cp) administration. The  cisplatin is widely used since its biochemical and histopathological characteristics are representative of drug-induced AKI in humans. Male Wistar rats were dosed once ip with 0, 1 and 3 mg/kg cisplatin. Tubular necorsis was observed histopathologically in all treated rats and war recovery on day 26. Gene expression profiling of the kidney cortex with microarrays 3, 5, 8, and 26 days after single administration of 3mg/kg Cp revealed a major profile pattern characterized by maximally increased and decreased mRNA levels on day 8, with clear changes already found 3 days after treatment for about half of the mRNAs. The mRNA expression pattern after administration of 1mg/kg Cp was overall similar, yet with a dose-dependent smaller fold-change. In summary we found 274 mRNAs showing significantly altered levels in the kidney of which 162 were increased and 112 decreased, respectively. Functional interpretation of the proteins encoded by these mRNAs revealed induction of a DNA damage response likely caused by the known molecular activity of Cp as DNA alkylating agent. Increased mRNAs associated with apoptosis (encoded by the corresponding genes like B-cell lymphoma 3-encoded protein, Bcl3; mouse double minute 2 homolog, Mdm2; p21/WAF1 also known as cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1), cell cycle regulation (encoded by the corresponding genes like Cyclin-G1, Ccng1; B-cell translocation gene 2, Btg2) and stress response may have partly been induced by the DNA damage, but also by the kidney damage associated with Cp administration. Increased levels of mRNAs indicating regeneration (encoded by the corresponding genes like SPARC- related modular calcium-binding protein 2, Smoc2; Tenascin C, Tnc) and decreased levels of mRNAs coding for proteins related to kidney function, indicating dedifferentiation, are likely related to the observed kidney injury.

DESIGN
Male Han Wistar rats (8 weeks old) were randomly grouped (n = 6) and dosed once i.p. with 0, 1 or 3 mg/kg body weight cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) (cisplatin; Sigma Aldrich, Germany) diluted in 0.9% saline. For histopathological examination of the kidney and for kidney RNA isolation animals were euthanized on days 3, 5, 8 and 26.

