TITLE
Carbon starvation along the maize leaf gradient

ORGANISM
Zea mays

SUMMARY
gene expression profiling in different zones along the gradient of the growing maize leaf balde aover a time course of dirunal cycle and carbon starvation by extension of the night Plants assimilate carbon in their photosynthetic tissues in the light. However, carbon is required during the night, and in non-photosynthetic organs. It is therefore essential that plants manage their carbon resources spatially and temporally and coordinate growth with carbon availability. In growing maize (Zea mays) leaf blades a defined developmental gradient facilitates analyses in the cell division, elongation and mature zones. We investigated the responses of the metabolome and transcriptome and polysome loading, as a qualitative proxy for protein synthesis, at dusk, dawn and 6, 14 and 24 hours into an extended night, and tracked whole leaf elongation over this time course. Starch and sugars are depleted by dawn in the mature zone, but only after an extension of the night in the elongation and division zones. Sucrose recovers partially between 14 and 24 h into the extended night in the growth zones but not the mature zone. The global metabolome and transcriptome track these zone-specific changes in sucrose. Leaf elongation and polysome loading in the growth zones also remain high at dawn, decrease between 6 and 14 h into the extended night and then partially recover indicating that growth processes are determined by local carbon status. The level of sucrose-signaling metabolite trehalose-6-phosphate, and the trehalose-6-phosphate:sucrose ratio are much higher in growth than mature zones at dusk and dawn but fall in the extended night. Candidate genes were identified by searching for transcripts that show characteristic temporal response patterns or contrasting responses to carbon starvation in growth and mature zones.

DESIGN
3 repliucates per time point and leaf region, each pooled form 5 indiviual plants

PLATFORM
GPL4032 [Maize] Affymetrix Maize Genome Array

CITATIONS
27582314

