TITLE
Effects of aflatoxin on hepatic gene expression in male broiler chicken

ORGANISM
Gallus gallus

SUMMARY
Aflatoxin is a toxic secondary metabolite produced by the fungi Aspergillus flavus and A. parasiticus. Ingredients of livestock and poultry feed are often contaminated with aflatoxin.  Aflatoxin affects many species including humans, dogs, cats, pigs, cattle, and poultry, with liver being the major organ affected. A chicken model was used to evaluate the effect of aflatoxin on hepatic gene expression. Seventy five day-old male broiler chicks were assigned to three dietary treatments (5 replicates of 5 chicks each) from hatch to day 21. The diets contained 0, 1 and 2 mg/kg aflatoxin/kg of feed. Feed intake, body weight gain, liver weights and serum chemistry were evaluated at the end of the study and liver samples were collected in RNase free tubes and stored at -80 ºC. Aflatoxin reduced (P ≤ 0.05) feed intake, body weight, serum total proteins, serum calcium and phosphorus but increased (P < 0.01) liver weights in a dose dependent manner. Microarray experiments were conducted using chicken long oligo arrays, to identify the changes in hepatic gene expression in chicks fed 0 (control) and 2mg/kg aflatoxin/kg of feed. A loop design was followed for microarray experiments with three technical and four biological replicates per treatment group. RNA was extracted from liver tissue and its quality was determined using gel electrophoresis. High quality RNA was purified from DNA contamination, reverse transcribed to cDNA and was used for microarray hybridizations. Microarray data was analyzed using a 2-step ANOVA model using GenePix and MAANOVA softwares, and the differentially expressed genes were identified using SAM, TIGR, and Cluster softwares. The microarray data was validated using real time PCR. It is hypothesized that genes associated with antioxidant, detoxification and immune systems were downregulated and the genes involved in cell proliferation were up-regulated in birds fed aflatoxin compared to controls Keywords: aflatoxin, chicken liver, microarrays, gene expression

