TITLE
Comparative genomic hybridization suggests a role for NRXN1 and APBA2 in schizophrenia

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Copy number variations (CNVs) account for a substantial proportion of human genomic variation, and have been shown to cause neurodevelopmental disorders. We sought to determine the relevance of CNVs to the aetiology of schizophrenia. Whole genome, high resolution, tiling path BAC array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) was employed to test DNA from 91 individuals with DSM-IV schizophrenia. Common DNA copy number changes that are unlikely to be directly pathogenic in schizophrenia were identified by comparison to a reference dataset of 372 control individuals analysed in our laboratory, and a screen against the Database of Genomic Variants. The remaining aberrations were tested for inheritance from the parents, and validated with Affymetrix 250K SNP arrays or 244K Agilent oligo-arrays. Thirteen aberrations satisfied our criteria. Two of them are very likely to be pathogenic. A deletion at 2p16.3 disrupts NRXN1 and was present in an affected sibling. A de novo duplication at 15q13.1 spans APBA2. The proteins of these two genes interact directly and play a role in synaptic development and function. Both genes have been affected by CNVs in other neurodevelopmental disorders. Keywords: Array CGH

DESIGN
We undertook a systematic search for CNVs in patients with schizophrenia using high resolution, whole genome tiling path BAC arrays. We selected 45 male and 48 female unrelated proband-parent trios from our sample of ~600 Bulgarian SZ trios recruited as described previously. In all cases IQ was > 70. The mean age of probands was 33.8 years (SD = 10.1, range 13-57 years). The mean age at onset of psychotic symptoms was 22.1 years (SD = 6.6, range 11-44 years). Sonicated patient and reference DNA was labelled by random priming (Bioprime Array CGH, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) with Cy3 and Cy5 (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ), respectively, and hybridized onto a tiling path BAC array, consisting of ~36,000 BAC clones obtained from several sources as described on our website ( http://www.molgen.mpg.de/~abt_rop/molecular_cytogenetics/ ). All protocols are also provided on that website. For the analysis and visualization of array CGH data, our software-package CGHPRO was employed. For the assessment of copy number gains and losses, we used conservative log2 ratio thresholds of 0.3 and -0.3, respectively. Deviant signal intensity ratios involving three or more neighboring BAC clones were considered to be potentially pathogenic, unless they were covered by more than one known DNA copy number variant, as listed in the Database of Genomic Variants. No dye swap was done. Array CGH analysis was successful in 91 cases.

PLATFORM
GPL5000 MPIMG Homo sapiens 44K ArrayCGH4 GPL5114 MPIMG Homo sapiens 36k_arrayCGH8

CITATIONS
17989066

