TITLE
Effect of cardiomyocyte specific KO of AKT1, AKT2, and AKT1 + AKT2  on gene expression profile of the heart

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
In the mammalian heart AKT1 and AKT2 are the isoforms of the protein kinase AKT (protein kinase B) which are predominantly expressed. AKT isoforms exert common and specific functions in the field of metabolism, cellular growth, apoptosis and cell migration. To identify specific and common functions of AKT1 and AKT2 isoforms, we generated tamoxifen-inducible, cardiomyocyte-specific AKT1, AKT2, and AKT1+AKT2 double knockout mice (iCMAKT – KO mice).  Inactivation of AKT isoforms was achieved by application of 4-OH-tamoxifen, which activates an OH-Tx inducible cre-recombinase expressed under the control of the αMHC-promoter (αMHC-mercremer). Transgenic mice expressing only the αMHCmercremer construct were also treated with OH-Tx and served as controls. To identify alterations in cardiac gene expression due to AKT deletion we analyzed gene expression profiles of control hearts, iCMAKT1, iCMAKT2 and iCMAKT1+2 hearts.

DESIGN
Gene expression of mouse hearts of inducible, cardiomyocyte-specific  AKT1, AKT2 and AKT1+AKT2 KO mice. Mice express a mercremer recombinase under control of the αMHC promotor.  AKT1 and AKT2 genes have loxP-flanked exons6 and7 and exon 5 exon 6 , respectively.  Control mice only express the MHCmercremer  gene. For RNA isolation four hearts of control  control mice, single knockouts and the double KO were used. At age of 3 month  mice were treated with 500µg hydroxytamoxifen (OH-Tx) per day for 5 days to induce the specific KO of AKT alleles in cardiomyocytes. Control mice express the MHCmercremer construct and were treated with OH-Tx equally. For RNA isolation four hearts of control and KO mice were harvested from 3 month old male mice 21 days after induction with OH-Tx. RNA was isolated from heart apex. 3 month old male mice  after 5 injections of 4OH-tamoxifen served as controls.

PLATFORM
GPL21163 Agilent-074809 SurePrint G3 Mouse GE v2 8x60K Microarray [Probe Name version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

