TITLE
N-arachidonoyl dopamine or vehicle control treated NRAS-G12D transformed Ba/F3 cells expression data

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
RAS oncogenic mutations are common in human cancers, but RAS proteins have been difficult to target. We sought to identify pharmacological agents to block the RAS oncogenic signaling by a distinct mechanism. Since the biological activity of RAS proteins rely upon lipid modifications and RAS regulates lipid metabolisms in cancer cells, we screened a bioactive lipid library using a RAS specific cell viability assay. We report the discovery of a new class of inhibitors for RAS transformation. Compounds in the class represented by endocannabinoid N-arachidonoyl dopamine (NADA) can induce cell oncosis, independent of its ability to engage cannabinoid receptors. Further analyses show that NADA is more active in inhibiting the NRAS transformation and signaling than that of KRAS4B. Mechanistically, NADA blocks the plasma membrane translocation of NRAS, but not that of KRAS4B. In addition, NADA inhibits the plasma membrane translocation and neoplastic transformation of oncogenic KRAS4A. Interestingly, NADA also redistributes the cytoplasmic NRAS to the Golgi apparatus in a palmitoylation-dependent manner. The results indicate that NADA inhibits NRAS and KRAS4A plasma membrane translocation by targeting a novel molecular process. The new findings would help to develop novel targeted therapies for a broad range of human cancers. To confirm the oncogenic RAS pathway interference of NADA, we performed microarray assay to detail the gene expression pattern change in order to figure out the RAS pathway affection and further indicate the underlying mechnism of the compound function.

DESIGN
In the microarray assay, two groups were included, which are NRAS-G12D transformed Ba/F3 (Ba/F3-N ) cells treated with vehicle or 1 μM NADA for 12 hours, respectively. Each group contains three replicates. In each sample, 1×107 cells were harvested and for RNA extraction. After quality control, the samples were subjected to the Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
27760835

