TITLE
ERK5 kinase activity is dispensable for cellular immune response and proliferation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Unlike other members of the MAPK family, ERK5 contains a large C-terminal domain with transcriptional activation capability in addition to an N-terminal canonical kinase domain.  Genetic deletion of ERK5 is embryonic lethal and tissue-restricted deletions have profound effects on erythroid development, cardiac function and neurogenesis.  In addition, depletion of ERK5 is anti-inflammatory and anti-tumorigenic.  Small molecule inhibition of ERK5 has been shown to have promising activity in cell and animal models of inflammation and oncology.  Here we report the synthesis and biological characterization of potent, selective ERK5 inhibitors.  In contrast to both genetic depletion/deletion of ERK5 and inhibition with previously reported compounds, inhibition of the kinase with the most selective of the new inhibitors had no anti-inflammatory or anti-proliferative activity.  The source of efficacy in previously reported ERK5 inhibitors is shown to be off-target activity on bromodomains (BRDs), conserved protein modules involved in recognition of acetyl-lysine residues during transcriptional processes.  It is likely that phenotypes reported from genetic deletion or depletion of ERK5 arise from removal of a non-catalytic function of ERK5.  The newly reported inhibitors should be useful in determining which of the many reported phenotypes are due to kinase activity, and delineate which can be pharmacologically targeted.

DESIGN
Two cellular models with reported ERK5-regulated signaling were used: Pam3CSK4-stimulated HUVECs as a model of inflammation, and EGF-stimulated HeLa cells as an established cell model of ERK5 regulation.  Cells were pre-incubated with DMSO vehicle, AX15836 (ERK5 inhibitor), AX15839 (dual ERK5/BRD inhibitor), or I-BET762 (BRD inhibitor), then stimulated with agonist.  Cellular responses were verified by immunoassays and western blots using replicate wells in the same experiment.

PLATFORM
GPL11154 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
27679845

