TITLE
Investigating the Gene Expression Profiles of Florida Manatees (Trichechus manatus latirostris) Rehabilitated Following a Red Tide

ORGANISM
Trichechus manatus latirostris

SUMMARY
To investigate a Florida manatee (Trichechus manatus latirostris) mortality event following a red tide bloom in Southwest Florida, a RNA-Seq experiment was conducted.  Cell processes such as immune response, cell proliferation and differentiation and apoptosis were among the most affected by red tide. These were involved in potential diseases such as neoplasms, inflammation, and wounds and injuries, among others. There were both up-regulated and down-regulated genes, but the highest fold changes relative to controls were for genes that were down-regulated. Piccolo presynaptic cytomatrix protein (PCLO) gene, the one most down-regulated (fold change -9.93; p-value 0.0009) is associated with neurotransmitter release, cognitive functioning, neuronal loss, and neuronal synapse function. Another gene that has a similar function, ankyrin 2, neuronal, transcript variant 1 (ANK2) was also down-regulated (fold change -8.66; p-value 0.0023). ANK2 is associated with the stability of neuron synapses. Two immune genes, interleukin 6 (interferon, beta 2) (IL6) and zinc finger protein 804B (ZNF804B), were down-regulated (fold change -9.31; p-value 0.000003 and fold change -8.90; p-value 0.0164, respectively). Interleukin 6 encodes proteins involved in acute phase response, inflammation, and autoimmune response. ZNF804B is associated with neuronal chemokine and cytokine regulation, autoimmune response, and immune activation. The family with sequence similarity 186, member A (FAM186A) gene was down-regulated (fold change -8.79; p-value 0.0143). FAM186A gene mutation is associated with tumor metastasis in colorectal cancer tumors. Among the most up-regulated genes, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) is involved in granulocytic differentiation and also involved with the immune system. Determining the differentially expressed genes associated with red tide enhances our understanding of manatee immune response to red tide toxins and aids in the development of red tide biomarkers. This information will better assist clinicians and researchers in diagnosing and treating future illnesses.

DESIGN
White blood cell or ‘buffy coat’ samples were collected from manatees (n=4) rescued from a red tide affected area and transported to the Lowry Park Zoo in Tampa, FL for rehabilitation. A RNA-Seq experiment was conducted to identify differentially expressed genes in the red tide group compared to a control population of manatees (n=7) from Brevard County (Indian River Lagoon) and Crystal River, FL.

PLATFORM
GPL22422 Illumina NextSeq 500 (Trichechus manatus latirostris)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

