TITLE
REGION-SPECIFIC NEURAL STEM CELL LINEAGES REVEALED BY SINGLE-CELL RNA-SEQ FROM HUMAN EMBRYONIC STEM CELLS [Cel-seq]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
During development of the human brain, multiple cell types with diverse regional identities are generated. Here we report a system to generate early human brain forebrain and mid/hindbrain cell types from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), and infer and experimentally confirm a lineage tree for the generation of these types based on single-cell RNA-Seq analysis. We engineered SOX2Cit/+ and DCXCit/Y hESC lines to target progenitors and neurons throughout neural differentiation for single-cell transcriptomic profiling, then identified discrete cell types consisting of both rostral (cortical) and caudal (mid/hindbrain) identities. Direct comparison of the cell types were made to primary tissues using gene expression atlases and fetal human brain single-cell gene expression data, and this established that the cell types resembled early human brain cell types, including preplate cells. From the single-cell transcriptomic data a Bayesian algorithm generated a unified lineage tree, and predicted novel regulatory transcription factors. The lineage tree highlighted a prominent bifurcation between cortical and mid/hindbrain cell types, confirmed by clonal analysis experiments. We demonstrated that cell types from either branch could preferentially generated by manipulation of the canonical Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. In summary, we present an experimentally validated lineage tree that encompasses multiple brain regions, and our work sheds light on the molecular regulation of region-specific neural lineages during human brain development.

DESIGN
The transcriptomes of 2684 single cells were profiled by CelSeq at different timepoints throughout a 54-day differentiation protocol that converted H1 human embryonic stem cells to a variety of brain cell types.

PLATFORM
GPL16791 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

