TITLE
De novo transcriptome analysis of weed Apera spica-venti from seven tissues and growth stages 

ORGANISM
Apera spica-venti

SUMMARY
Loose silky bentgrass (Apera spica-venti) is an important weed in Europe. It can cause up to 30% yield loses. There is little molecular information available about this species. The lack of genetic information limits the biological understanding of this important noxious weed species such as growth, genetic variation, reproduction, biosynthesis of metabolites and metabolic mechanisms of herbicide resistance. This study produced a reference transcriptome for A. spica-venti from different tissues (leaf, root, stem) and various growth stages (seed at phenological stages 05, 07, 08, 09).

DESIGN
Seeds from six herbicide susceptible populations of Apera spica-venti originating at six different locations in Denmark, were mixed together to create a meta-population encompassing a range of genetic variations possible within the species. Each of these six populations were previously tested between 2007 and 2010 with ALS and ACCase inhibitor herbicides and found to be susceptible (Mathiassen, pers. comm). Seeds were sown under greenhouse conditions on table with an automatic watering system. Leaf, stem, and root material from individual plant were harvested once the plants were at BBCH stage 34 to 36 (stem elongation). Tissues were cut in small pieces and immediately put in liquid nitrogen and then stored at -80°C. These tissues were kept separated by individual plant. Seeds from this meta-population were sown in 9 cm petri dishes with four filter papers and grown in a climate cabinet (Termaks Series KB8000L) at night/day temperatures of 10ºC /17ºC for 10h/14h, and imbibed with 5 mL of demineralized water. Germinated seeds were harvested at stage BBCH 05 (radicle emerges from seed), 07 (coleoptile emerges from caryopsis), 08 (coleoptile elongation), and 09 (Emergence: coleoptile breaks through soil surface). A total of 0.5 g of frozen tissue from leaf, stem, and root was grounded separately using a 2010 Geno/Grinder (SPEX Sample prep, Stanmore, UK) for 45 sec at 1,500 hertz and then soaked in liquid nitrogen. A total of 0.7 g of germinated seeds were grounded using the same method but for 2 cycles of 45 seconds at 1,500 hertz and were not soaked in liquid nitrogen. The RNA mini plant kit (Qiagen, Hilsen, Germany) was used for RNA extraction following the manufacturer protocol, three wash steps were performed. RNA quality was verified using a spectrophotometer (Nanodrop 3300, Wilmington, USA) and bioanalyzer (Agilent 2100, Santa Clara, USA). Samples that showed a RIN value of 6.0 and more were treated with DNAse 1 according to the protocol (Qiagen, Hilsen, Germany) and suspended in a final volume of 14 μL. RNA quality was verified again with spectrophotometer (NanoDrop-1000 v.3.1.0) and bioanalyzer using the RNA 6000 Plant Nano program (Agilent 2100). Samples with a RIN value higher than 6 were selected for cDNA library construction. The lower than recommended ( > 8) RIN value threshold selected here is because of difficulties in extracting high quality RNA from germinated seed samples. Nine libraries were created; seven for each of the individual tissues/growth stage samples, and two more libraries for leaf and root respectively to be sequenced by both 5’ and 3’ end for analysis of transcript start site because we believe they have the most important number of expressed genes of interest for future study. Samples of mRNA were selected and fragmentedand  transformed to 150-400 bp  short insert, strand specific cDNA libraries for sequencing on Illumina HiSeq 2500 with chemistry version 3 (Eurofins MGW, Germany)

PLATFORM
GPL22445 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Apera spica-venti)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

