TITLE
Drosophila Myb-MuvB/dREAM (Expression data)

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Myb-MuvB (MMB)/dREAM is a nine subunit complex first described in Drosophila as a repressor of transcription, dependent upon E2F2 and the RBFs. Myb, an integral member of MMB, curiously plays no role in the silencing of the test genes previously analyzed. Moreover, Myb plays an activating role in DNA replication in Drosophila egg chamber follicle cells. The essential functions for Myb are executed as part of MMB. This duality of function lead to the hypothesis that MMB, which contains both known activator and repressor proteins, might function as part of a switching mechanism that is dependent upon DNA sites and developmental context. Here, we used proliferating Drosophila Kc tissue culture cells to explore both the network of genes regulated by MMB (employing RNAi and micro-array expression analysis) and the genomic locations of MMB following chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and tiling array analysis. MMB occupies thousands of chromosomal sites where a substantial number are proximal to repressed genes that are normally expressed in a wide range of developmental pathways. At many of these sites, E2F2 was critical for repression whereas at other non-overlapping sites, Myb was critical for repression. These data highlight that the MMB factors are utilized in a combinatorial way for targeting gene regulation. We also found sites where MMB was a positive regulator of transcript levels that included genes required for mitotic functions (G2/M), which may explain some of the chromosome instability phenotypes attributed to loss of Myb function in myb mutants. Keywords: Drosophila Myb-MuvB/dREAM, RNAi, ChIP-chip

DESIGN
RNAi to deplete Lin-52, Mip40, Myb, Mip120, Mip130, E2F2, both RBFs (RBF1 and RBF2) and L(3)MBT were performed in triplicate. RNAi with a nonspecific RNA derived from a pBSK+ plasmid (named SK+) was used as control. Total RNA was extracted from RNAi-transfected cells after 4 days using RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN).

PLATFORM
GPL72 [DrosGenome1] Affymetrix Drosophila Genome Array

CITATIONS
17978103

