TITLE
The small RNA repertoire of Dictyostelium discoideum

ORGANISM
Dictyostelium discoideum

SUMMARY
Small RNAs play crucial roles in regulation of gene expression in many eukaryotes. Here, we report the cloning and characterization of 18-26 nt RNAs in the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. This survey uncovered developmentally regulated microRNA candidates whose biogenesis, at least in one case, is dependent on a Dicer homolog, DrnB. Furthermore, we identified a large number of 21 nt RNAs originating from the DIRS-1 retrotransposon, clusters of which have been suggested to constitute centromeres. Small RNAs from another retrotransposon, Skipper, were significantly up-regulated in strains depleted of the second Dicer-like protein, DrnA, and a putative RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, RrpC. In contrast, the expression of DIRS-1 small RNAs was not altered in any of the analyzed strains. This suggests the presence of multiple RNAi pathways in D. discoideum. In addition, we isolated several small RNAs with antisense complementarity to mRNAs. Three of these mRNAs are developmentally regulated. Interestingly, all three corresponding genes express longer antisense RNAs from which the small RNAs may originate. In at least one case, the longer antisense RNA is complementary to the spliced but not the unspliced pre-mRNA, indicating synthesis by an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Keywords: cDNA library; small RNA sequencing

DESIGN
The aim of this study was to investigate the small RNA (18-26 nt) profile of Dictyostelium discoideum during growth and development. For this reason, we cloned and sequenced pooled small RNAs from growing single cells and from two different multicellular stages (16 and 24 hours of development). cDNA libraries of 18-26 nt D. discoideum RNAs were constructed according to two different protocols (Lee, R.C. and Ambros, V. (2001)  Science, 294; Lau, N.C. et al (2001) Science, 294). Briefly, total RNA was isolated from growing D. discoideum AX4 strain cells as well as from cells developed for 16 hours and 24 hours, and the fractions were subsequently pooled. After size fractionation and ligation of a 3’ linker, the RNA was divided into two fractions, one of which was directly ligated to a 5’ linker, thus selecting for small RNAs with 5’ monophosphates. Following RT-PCR, the PCR fragments were cloned and sequenced. The second fraction was subjected to reverse transcription directly after 3’ ligation. Apart from synthesizing a complementary DNA strand, the reverse transcriptase adds a few non-templated C residues at the 3’ end. These C:s were then hybridized to a DNA oligo with three 3’ G:s followed by RT-PCR, cloning and sequencing. This approach is insensitive of the nature of the 5’ end of the small RNA.

PLATFORM
GPL5734 Dictyostelium discoideum small RNA sequences

CITATIONS
17916577

