TITLE
Global gene expression profiling and antibiotic susceptibility after repeated exposure to the carbon monoxide-releasing molecule-2 (CORM-2) in multidrug-resistant ESBL-producing uropathogenic Escherichia coli

ORGANISM
Escherichia coli

SUMMARY
Treatment of urinary tract infections is today a challenge due to the increasing prevalence of multidrug-resistant ESBL-producing uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC). There is an urgent need for new treatment strategies for multidrug-resistant UPEC and preferably with targets that have low potential for development of resistance. Carbon monoxide-releasing molecules (CORMs) are novel and potent antibacterial agents. The present study examines the transcriptomic targets of CORM-2 in a multidrug-resistant ESBL-producing UPEC isolate (ESBL7) in response to a single exposure to CORM-2 and after repeated exposure to CORM-2. The bacterial viability and minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) were also examined after repeated exposure to CORM-2. Microarray analysis revealed that a wide range of processes were affected by CORM-2, including a general trend of down-regulation in energy metabolism and biosynthesis pathways and up-regulation of the SOS response and DNA repair. Several genes involved in virulence (ibpB), antibiotic resistance (marAB, mdtABC) and biofilm formation (bhsA, yfgF) were up-regulated, while some genes involved in virulence (kpsC, fepCEG, entABE), antibiotic resistance (evgA) and biofilm formation (artIP) were down-regulated. Repeated exposure to CORM-2 did not alter the gene expression patterns, the growth inhibitory response to CORM-2 or the MIC values for CORM-2, cefotaxime, ciprofloxacin and trimethoprim.

DESIGN
ESBL7 from the original isolate, or isolates pre-exposed 20 times to CORM-2 (250 µM) or vehicle (2.5% DMSO) for 4 hours at 37 °C, were used to inoculate MS-medium followed by exposure to CORM-2 (250 µM) or vehicle for 30 min at 37 °C. Microarray were performed on first exposure to sub-inhibitory levels of CORM-2 (250 µM), first exposure to vehicle (2.5% DMSO), pre-exposed 20 times to CORM-2 respectively pre-exposed 20 times to vehicle. Four independent experiments were included in each group.

PLATFORM
GPL13359 Agilent-020097 E. coli Gene Expression Microarray (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

