TITLE
Chilling stress transcriptional regulatory networks of japonica rice

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa

SUMMARY
The central role of transcriptional regulation in integrating various low temperature response mechanisms has been established in Arabidopsis, where the CBF/DREB regulon plays a prominent role during acclimation. Rice is sensitive to chilling but many japonica cultivars can survive continuous exposure to as low as 10oC for up to 7 days during the most critical stage of seedling establishment better than most indica cultivars. The transcriptional regulatory networks that define this variation have not been studied in detail as cold acclimation has been scrutinized in Arabidopsis. Towards the comparison of the compositional complexity of low temperature response regulons of rice and Arabidopsis, we used the cultivar Nipponbare for genome-wide survey of regulatory clusters by integrative analysis of promoter architectures and temporal expression profiles during exposure to 10oC at narrow time intervals. Temporal profiles revealed major clusters of genes that were induced within the initial 24 hours. These clusters were further defined by common features of having either CRT/DRE-like elements, as1/ocs-like elements or both in their promoters. Genes containing as1/ocs-like elements with or without CRT/DRE, but not those containing only CRT/DRE-like elements were induced by exogenous H2O2 but not by ABA at ambient temperature, suggesting that they belong to a potential regulon (ROS-bZIP – as1/ocs module) that responds to elevated levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) during the initial stages of stress.  Parallel analysis of transcription factors during the initial 12 hours revealed candidate regulator(s) of this putative early response regulon. Cultivar-specific expression signatures of selected members of this regulatory cluster were also positively correlated with genotypic variation in chilling tolerance. We hypothesized that the ROS-bZIP – as1/ocs cluster has important roles in configuring the transcriptome of rice seedlings during the early stages of chilling stress and it appears to be independent of ABA and functions in parallel to the CBF/DREB regulon. Keywords: time course (response to low temperature)

DESIGN
This experiment describes the analysis of the temporal changes in gene expression in response to chilling temperature in Nipponbare rice. A total of 10 stress time points, i.e., 0.5, 2, 4, 6, 12, 18, 24, 36, 48, and 96 hrs after exposure to 10C in a growth chamber and one recovery time point, i.e., 96 hrs at 10C and then 24 hrs (24R) at ambient or control temperature (29C), were profiled with reference to a corresponding control, which was exposed to ambient temperature (29C) for the same length of time under cold stress (each stress time point has a corresponding control sample).  Control and cold stress samples were labeled with Cy5 and Cy3, respectively. No dye swap replicate was performed in this experiment. The microarray platform used in this study was the 45K oligonucleotide microarray (www.ricearray.org) which comes in pairs of slides A and B (each containing about 50% of the total number of features). The data described in this series include all hybridizations with slide A and with slide B. All experiments were performed with two independent biological replicates (R1 and R2) for each time point.

PLATFORM
GPL5739 TIGR NSF rice oligonucleotide microarray A (seedling cold stress) GPL5740 TIGR NSF rice oligonucleotide microarray B (seedling cold stress)

CITATIONS
20100339

