TITLE
Expression analysis of the salt stress response in Arabidopsis mutants with defects in hair patterning

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
We performed an expression analysis of the response of seedling root tips to 1 hour of treatment with 140mM NaCl using mutants defective in root hair patterning. Cells are amazingly adept at integrating both external and internal cues to regulate transcriptional states.  While internal processes such as differentiation and cell-type specification are generally understood to have an important impact on gene expression, very little is known about how cells utilize these developmental cues to regulate responses to external stimuli.  Here we use the response to a well characterized environmental stress, high salinity, to obtain a global view of the role that cell identity plays in guiding transcriptional responses in the root of Arabidopsis.  Our analysis is based on three microarray data sets we have generated that explore transcriptional changes spatially among 6 cell layers and 4 longitudinal regions or temporally along 5 time points after salt treatment.  We show that the majority of the response to salt stress is cell-type specific resulting in the differential regulation of unique biological functions in subsets of cell layers.  To understand the regulatory mechanisms controlling these responses we have analyzed cis-element enrichment in the promoters of salt responsive genes and demonstrate that known stress regulatory elements likely control responses to salt occurring in multiple cell types.  Despite the extensive shift in transcriptional state that salt stress elicits, we are able to identify several biological processes that consistently define each cell layer and find that transcriptional regulators of cell-identity tend to exhibit robust cell-type specific expression.  Finally, using mutants that disrupt cell-type specification in the epidermis, we reveal cell autonomous and non-autonomous effects when cell identity is altered.  Together, these data elucidate a novel intersection between physiology and development and expand our understanding of how transcriptional states are regulated in a multi-cellular context. Keywords: Response analysis of mutants

DESIGN
Seedlings were grown for 5 days before being transferred to standard media or media supplemented with 140mM NaCl.  One hour after transfer, a razor blade was used to cut the root ~5 mm above the root tip.  Approximately 30 roots were pooled per replicate.  Two biological replicates were performed per genotype, per condition.

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
18436742

