TITLE
Anopheles gambiae immune responses to human and rodent Plasmodium parasite species

ORGANISM
Anopheles gambiae

SUMMARY
Transmission of malaria is dependent on the successful completion of the Plasmodium lifecycle in the Anopheles vector. Major obstacles are encountered in the midgut tissue, where most parasites are killed by the mosquito’s immune system. In the present study, DNA microarray analyses have been used to compare Anopheles gambiae responses to invasion of the midgut epithelium by the ookinete stage of the human pathogen Plasmodium falciparum and the rodent experimental model pathogen P. berghei. Invasion by P. berghei had a more profound impact on the mosquito transcriptome, including a variety of functional gene classes, while P. falciparum elicited a broader immune response at the gene transcript level. Ingestion of human malaria-infected blood lacking invasive ookinetes also induced a variety of immune genes, including several anti-Plasmodium factors. Keywords: Anopheles gambiae, Plasmodium falciparum, ookinete, invasion, innate immunity

DESIGN
By comparing gene expression patterns between carcassess or guts of mosquitoes that fed on a P. falciparum or P. berghei wt and mosquitoes that fed on invasion incapable strains we gain information on the A. gambiae transcriptional responses to the invading ookinete at 24 hours after feeding. By comparing gene expression patterns between carcassess or guts of mosquitoes that fed on a P. falciparum ookinete invasion incapable strain and mosquitoes that fed on non-infected blood we gain information on the A. gambiae transcriptional responses to malaria infected blood in absence of ookinete invasion at 24 hours after feeding. By comparing gene expression patterns between mosquitoes at 4 hours after being injected with either E. coli or S. aureus and mosquitoes injected with sterile PBS we gain information on the mosquito's transcriptional response to these bacterial challenges.

PLATFORM
GPL5001 Anopheles gambiae GAMBER_AG Array

CITATIONS
16789837

