TITLE
Hepatic transcriptional profiling of juvenile broiler chickens divergently selected for abdominal fatness or leanness

ORGANISM
Gallus gallus

SUMMARY
Chickens divergently selected for either high abdominal fat content (fat genotype) or low abdominal fat content (lean genotype) at SRA-INRA, France were used to profile hepatic gene expression during juvenile development (1 to 11 weeks of age) and to identify differentially expressed genes associated with genotype and age. The fat line (FL) and lean line (LL) chickens are different in various phenotypic and metabolic measurements, including abdominal fatness, plasma glycemia and T3. The FL and LL chickens represent unique models for characterizing biomedical and agricultural traits. The Del-Mar 14K Chicken Integrated Systems microarrays were used for a transcriptional scan in liver during juvenile development using a balanced block hybridization design. Log2-transformed fluorescence intensities were analyzed with a two-stage mixed model. A total of 905 differentially expressed " functional " genes were identified (FDR < 0.10). The greatest number of differentially expressed genes (400) was detected at 7 weeks of age. The differentially expressed genes include metabolic enzymes, acute phase proteins, growth factors, immune factors and transcription factors involved in various pathways. Several of the functional genes are also identified as positional candidate genes within QTLs in an F2 population established from an intercross between the FL and LL lines. Keywords: Divergently selected chickens, fatness, transcriptional profiling, differentially expressed genes

DESIGN
A balance block design was used for microarray hybridizations, where half of the birds of each genotype and age were labeled with Alexa Flour 647 (red) and the other half with Alexa Flour 555 (green). Four biological replicates were used for each genotype (FL or LL) at six different ages (1, 3, 5, 7, 9 and 11 wk).

PLATFORM
GPL1731 DEL-MAR 14K Integrated Systems

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

