TITLE
Anopheles gambiae genome-wide gene expression in response to bloodmeal

ORGANISM
Anopheles gambiae

SUMMARY
With their genome sequenced, Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes now serve as a powerful tool for basic research in comparative, evolutionary and developmental biology. The knowledge generated by these studies is expected to reveal molecular targets for novel vector control and pathogen transmission blocking strategies. Comparisons of gene-expression profiles between adult male and nonblood-fed female Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes revealed that roughly 22% of the genes showed sex-dependent regulation. Blood-fed females switch the majority of their metabolism to blood digestion and egg formation within 3 h after the meal is ingested, in detriment to other activities such as flight and response to environment stimuli. Changes in gene expression are most evident during the first, second and third days after a blood meal, when as many as 50% of all genes showed significant variation in transcript accumulation. After laying the first cluster of eggs (between 72 and 96 h after the blood meal), mosquitoes return to a nongonotrophic stage, similar but not identical to that of 3-dayold nonblood-fed females. Ageing and/or the nutritional state of mosquitoes at 15 days after a blood meal is reflected by the down-regulation of 5% of all genes. A full description of the large number of genes regulated at each analysed time point and each biochemical pathway or biological processes in which they are involved is not possible within the scope of this contribution. Therefore, we present descriptions of groups of genes displaying major differences in transcript accumulation during the adult mosquito life. However, a publicly available searchable database (Anopheles gambiae Gene Expression Database at UC Irvine) has been made available so that detailed analyses of specific groups of genes based on their descriptions, functions or levels of gene expression variation can be performed by interested investigators according to their needs. Keywords: response to bloodmeal

DESIGN
12 Samples analyzed, 3 replicates per sample, Affymetrix internal controls

PLATFORM
GPL1321 [Plasmodium_Anopheles] Affymetrix Plasmodium/Anopheles Genome Array

CITATIONS
16469063 , 16707020

