TITLE
Overexpression of the Apoptotic Cell Removal Receptor, MERTK, in Alveolar Macrophages of Cigarette Smokers

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Mononuclear phagocytes play an important role in the removal of apoptotic cells by expressing cell surface receptors that recognize and remove apoptotic cells. Based on the knowledge that cigarette smoking is associated with increased lung cell turnover, we hypothesized that alveolar macrophages (AM) of normal cigarette smokers may exhibit enhanced expression of apoptotic cell removal receptor genes. AM obtained by bronchoalveolar lavage of normal non-smokers (n=11) and phenotypic normal smokers (n=13, 36 ± 6 pack-yr) were screened for mRNA expression of all known apoptotic cell removal receptors using Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus 2.0 chips with TaqMan RT-PCR confirmation. Of the 14 known apoptotic receptors expressed, only MER Tyrosine Kinase (MERTK), a transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptor, was significantly up-regulated in smokers. MERTK expression was then assessed in AM of smokers vs nonsmokers by TaqMan RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry, Western and flow analysis. Smoker AM had up-regulation of MERTK mRNA levels (smoker vs non-smoker, 3.6-fold by microarray, p < 0.003; 9.5-fold by TaqMan RT-PCR, p < 0.02). Immunohistochemistry demonstrated a qualitative increase in MERTK protein expression on AM of smokers. Increased protein expression of MERTK on AM of smokers was confirmed by Western and flow analyses (p < 0.007 and p < 0.0002, respectively). MERTK, a cell surface receptor that recognizes apoptotic cells, is expressed on human AM, and its expression is up-regulated in AM of cigarette smokers. This may reflect an increased demand for removal of apoptotic cells in smokers, an observation with implications for the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), a disorder associated with dysregulated apoptosis of lung parenchymal cells. Keywords: Comparison of gene expression in alveolar macrophages of normal non-smokers and normal smokers.

DESIGN
Alveolar macrophages were obtained from bronchoalveolar lavage.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
18587056

