TITLE
Global expression profiling applied to the analysis of Arabidopsis stamen development

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
To obtain detailed information about gene expression during stamen development in Arabidopsis thaliana, we compared, by microarray analysis, the gene expression profile of wild-type inflorescences to those of the floral mutants apetala3, sporocyteless/nozzle, and male sterile 1, in which different aspects of stamen formation are disrupted. These experiments led to the identification of groups of genes with predicted expression at early, intermediate and late stages of stamen development. Additional experiments aimed at characterizing gene expression specifically during microspore formation. To this end, we compared the gene expression profiles of wild-type flowers of distinct developmental stages to those of the male sterile 1 mutant. Computational analysis of the datasets derived from this experiment led to the identification of genes that are likely involved in the control of key developmental processes during microsporogenesis. Keywords: mutant comparison, developmental series

DESIGN
To identify genes expressed during distinct stages of stamen development at a genome-wide scale, we compared, by microarray analysis, the gene expression profiles of flowers of ap3, spl/nzz, and ms1 mutants to that of wild-type flowers. For the identification of transcripts expressed at early stages of stamen development, we dissected older flowers from inflorescences of ap3 mutant plants and the wild type and then collected the inflorescence meristem and floral buds up to early stage 10 for analysis. We refer to these tissue samples as ap3 early stages, or ap3 es. The second mutant included in our analysis, spl/nzz, shows defects at the earliest steps of sporogenesis. Thus, we expected that genes expressed in sporogenous tissues would be down-regulated in mutant flowers compared to the wild type. Lastly, we analyzed the ms1 mutant to identify genes expressed during pollen development and maturation. For both ms1and spl/nzz, as well as for the wild type, tissue samples containing the inflorescence meristem and floral buds up to stage 13 were collected for analysis. To gain more detailed insights into the transcriptional program underlying microspore development in Arabidopsis, we made further use of the ms1 mutant, which lacks viable pollen. We collected flowers from ms1 and wild-type plants and pooled them according to their developmental stages into 7 tissue samples, where sample 1 contained mature (stage 13) flowers and subsequent samples contained successively younger flowers, with sample 7 containing the youngest floral buds and the inflorescence meristem. Gene expression profiling experiments were done using oligonucleotide microarrays, as described previously (Wellmer et al. (2006) PLoS Genetics 2, e117. In all cases, at least three independent biological samples were used in separate hybridizations, and the dyes used for labeling of the co-hybridized samples were switched in the replicate experiments.

PLATFORM
GPL5762 Meyerowitz Lab Arabidopsis Operon Array Version 2

CITATIONS
17905860

