TITLE
Global analysis of translation termination in E. coli using release factor manipulations

ORGANISM
Escherichia coli

SUMMARY
Terminating protein translation accurately and efficiently is critical for both protein fidelity and ribosome recycling for continued translation. The three bacterial release factors (RFs) play key roles:  RF1 and 2 recognize stop codons and terminate translation; and RF3 promotes disassociation of bound release factors. Probing release factors mutations with reporter constructs containing programmed frameshifting sequences or premature stop codons had revealed a propensity for readthrough or frameshifting at these specific sites, but their effects on translation genome-wide have not been examined. We performed ribosome profiling on a set of isogenic strains with well-characterized release factor mutations to determine how they alter translation globally.  Consistent with their known defects, strains with increasingly severe release factor defects exhibit increasingly severe accumulation of ribosomes over stop codons, indicative of an increased duration of the termination/release phase of translation. Release factor mutant strains also exhibit increased occupancy in the region following the stop codon at a significant number of genes.  Our global analysis revealed that, as expected, translation termination is generally efficient and accurate, but that at a significant number of genes (≥ 50) the ribosome signature after the stop codon is suggestive of translation past the stop codon. Even native E. coli K-12 exhibits the ribosome signature suggestive of protein extension, especially at UGA codons, which rely exclusively on the reduced function RF2 allele of the K-12 strain for termination. Deletion of RF3 increases the severity of the defect.  We unambiguously demonstrate readthrough and frameshifting protein extensions and their further accumulation in mutant strains for a few select cases. In addition to enhancing recoding, ribosome accumulation over stop codons disrupts attenuation control of biosynthetic operons, and may alter expression of some overlapping genes.  Together, these functional alterations may either augment the protein repertoire or produce deleterious proteins.

DESIGN
Samples of WT, ∆RF3, RF2B, and RF2B∆RF3 were analyzed by ribosome profiling and RNA-seq. Over 4 experiments there are 4 replicates of WT, 2 replicates of ∆RF3, 2 replicates of RF2B and 5 replicates of RF2B∆RF3. One experiment (both ribosome profiling and RNA-seq) was performed in minimal media with a single sample for WT and ∆RF3

PLATFORM
GPL14548 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Escherichia coli)

CITATIONS
28301469

