TITLE
Islet cells CD40L_vs_ islet cells CTRL

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Expression of CD40 in non-hematopoietic cells has been linked to inflammation.  We presented evidence that CD40, a T-cell costimulatory molecule, is expressed in human β-cells and the engagement of CD40 in insulinoma cells activated the NFKB and ERK1/2 pathways. CD40 activation in human islets cells induced secretion of IL-8, MCP-1 and MIP-1 β, which is abrogated by inhibitors of NFkB and ERK1/2 inhibitors. In this study,  we have studied gene expression mediated by CD40-CD40L interaction in islet cells. This approach identified 90 genes and transcripts exhibiting at least a 1.7 fold increase in their expression intensity after treatment with soluble CD40L. A significant number of genes were related to inflammation and oxidative stress. We have a strong overexpression of CXCL1 (Groα), CXCL2 (Mif2) and CXCL3; chemokines belonging to CXC family structurally related to Il-8. 11 genes were selected from this group and further quantified by Real Time PCR, including CXCL1. Activation of islet cells with CD40L induced the secretion of CXCL1 in a NFKB dependent manner. Engagement of CD40 in islet cells did not induce apoptosis, neither β-cell death and did not enhanced TNF-α mediated cell death as observed in insulinoma cells. CD40 activation in insulinoma cells, results in ERK1/2 dependent phsophorylation of synapsin I, a protein associated with the exocytosis machinery in neurons and β-cells.  However, treatment of islets with soluble CD40L did not affect glucose induced insulin secretion.  It has been reported that ductal cells always present in human islet preparations express CD40 constitutively (ref).  We found that CD40-CD40L interaction in ductal cells, unlike in β-cells, induces secretion of diabetogenic cytokines IFNγ and TNF-α.  Furthermore, incubation of islets containing ductal cells with CD40L decreased β-cells viability as assessed by measurement of their mitochondrial membrane potential Keywords: Pancreas, Islets of Langerhans,  chemokines, cytokines, inflammation, apoptosis, Nuclear Factor-κB(NFκB)

DESIGN
We isolated islet cells from three patients. Part of islet cells from each patient has been treated with CD40L. We compared gene expression in treated cells vs untreated for each patient using dye-swap.

PLATFORM
GPL1708 Agilent-012391 Whole Human Genome Oligo Microarray G4112A (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
18661119

