TITLE
Two distinct extracellular RNA signatures released by a single cell type identified by microarray and next-generation sequencing [miRNA]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Cells secrete extracellular RNA (exRNA) to their surrounding environment and exRNA has been found in many body fluids such as blood, breast milk and cerebrospinal fluid.  However, there are conflicting results regarding the nature of exRNA. Here, we have separated two distinct exRNA profiles released by mast cells, here termed high-density (HD) and low-density (LD) exRNA. The exRNA in both fractions was characterized by microarray and next-generation sequencing. Both exRNA fractions contained mRNA and miRNA, and the mRNAs in the LD exRNA correlated closely with the cellular mRNA, whereas the HD mRNA did not. Furthermore, the HD exRNA was enriched in lincRNA, antisense RNA, vault RNA, snoRNA, and snRNA with little or no evidence of full-length 18S and 28S rRNA. The LD exRNA was enriched in mitochondrial rRNA, mitochondrial tRNA, tRNA, piRNA, Y RNA, and full-length 18S and 28S rRNA. The proteomes of the HD and LD exRNA-containing fractions were determined with LC-MS/MS and analysed with Gene Ontology term finder, which showed that both proteomes were associated with the term extracellular vesicles and electron microscopy suggests that at least a part of the exRNA is associated with exosome-like extracellular vesicles. Additionally, the proteins in the HD fractions tended to be associated with the nucleus and ribosomes, whereas the LD fraction proteome tended to be associated with the mitochondrion. We show that the two exRNA signatures released by a single cell type can be separated by floatation on a density gradient. These results show that cells can release multiple types of exRNA with substantial differences in RNA species content. This is important for any future studies determining the nature and function of exRNA released from different cells under different conditions.

DESIGN
Samples were analysed in three biological replicates. The samples were of three typs; mast cells, and the RNA secreted my these cells into the extracelllular space isolated by ultracentrifugation and denisty gradients, were the extracellular RNA was divided into a high density and a low density fraction. Resulting in 9 samples in total, which are paired, that this the RNA in cell 1, HD 1 and LD 1 are isolated from the cell culture and so on. Please note that the accession numbers for the associated NGS and proteomic data are PRJNA343960 (BioProject) and PXD004931 (PRIDE archive).

PLATFORM
GPL17061 3D-Gene Human miRNA V19_1.0.0

CITATIONS
27791479

