TITLE
Expression data from livers of rats treated with control, D3T, OLT, or TBD

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
The activities of the dithiolethione analogs, D3T, OLT, and TBD are pharmacologically well-understood.  These compounds act as chemopreventive agents whose ability is to block or diminish early stages of carcinogenesis.  In addition, the three compounds are classified as monofunctional Phase II enzyme inducers and activate the same pathway, namely the Keap1-Nrf2 signal pathway. The three dithiolethiones were showed to ameliorate the AFB1-induced toxicity through increasing phase II enzymes including glutathione S-transferase (GST).  The parent D3T was observed to be the most potent chemoprotective agent.  Oltipraz, a clinically approved drug, has been shown to exhibit less efficacy than its analogs for inhibition of aflatoxin-induced hepatic foci.TBD was suggested to be better than OLT as a chemopreventive agent because of its reduced toxicity profile. Thus based on gene expressions, our goal is to study the closely related structure activities that lie within the three compounds and the activity of OLT versus TBD at the 5 position of their dithiole rings and to determine whether the activity of TBD is closely related to OLT or its parent D3T. Keywords: treatment effects

DESIGN
Male Fischer F344 rats (80-100g) were obtained from Harlan at 6 wk of age. General procedures for animal care and housing were in accordance with the Guide for the Care and use of Laboratory Animals, National Research Council, 1996.  The animals were singly housed in polycarbonate cages in a temperature (22 ± 1°C)- and humidity (30-70%)-controlled room with a 14:10-h light-dark cycle, respectively.  Rat AIN 76A chow (Harlan Teklad) and tap water were provided at libitum. Sixteen animals were randomly assigned into four groups (n=16) and treated by gavage with 100?l of either vehicle (saturated sucrose), 3H-1,2-dithiole-3-thione (D3T), (0.3 mmol/kg body wt), 4-methyl-5-pyrazinyl-3H-1,2-dithiole-3-thione (oltipraz-OLT), (0.3 mmol/kg), and 5-tert-butyl-3H-1,2-dithiole-3-thione (TBD) , (0.3mmol/kg body wt),  once every other day for 5 days.  Animals were killed 24h after the third dose.  Liver tissues were harvested and snap frozen.  The protocol for this study was approved by the University of Memphis Animal Care Committee and Johns Hopkins University.

PLATFORM
GPL85 [RG_U34A] Affymetrix Rat Genome U34 Array

CITATIONS
19126641

