TITLE
Microarray Analysis on Salt Stress Affected Genes in Tomato Seedlings

ORGANISM
Solanum lycopersicum

SUMMARY
Large-scale gene expression affected by salt stress was analyzed with  tomato seedlings (Lycoperson esculentum Mill cv. Money Maker) by a cDNA microarray (Tom1).  The significantly differentially expressed genes (5% Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate) consisted of 1757 sequences in the analyzed tissues (cotyledons + shoot tip). Genes with over 2 fold difference were selected from the list and further categorized into different function and cellular processes. Tomato homologous genes for the chaperone proteins, antioxidant enzymes (catalase and peroxidase), and ion transporters (Na+-driven multidrug efflux pump, vacuolar ATPase, and others) were induced. The ACC oxidase and ethylene-responsive gene tomato homologs had higher transcript level after salt treatment. Multiple members with different expression patterns were identified for the  bZIP, WRKY, and MADS-box transcription regulator. Different genes in the signal transduction pathway, such as the protein kinases (Shaggy kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinase, ethylene receptor neverripe, and others), protein phosphatases, calmodulin, G-protein, and the N- myristoyltransferase, were regulated by salt stress. Most of the protease and the inhibitor homologs were suppressed by salt stress. In addition, different isoforms of cytochrome P450, genes for polyamine biosynthesis (putrescine and proline) and detoxification compounds (glutathione and thioredoxin), several key enzyme genes in the metabolic pathways of carbohydrates, amino acids, and fatty acids, were also affected by salt treatment. This study has provided a set of candidate genes, especially those in the regulatory machinery that can be further investigated to define salt stress in tomato and other plant species. Keywords: treatment response

DESIGN
Effect of 75mM NaCl on gene’s expression in tomato seedlings, Lycoperscon esculentum Mill. cv. Money Maker after 17 d of treatment. Each sample represents a pool of same tissue 20 seedlings grown in two flasks.  Experiment was done in triplicate.

PLATFORM
GPL5775 CGEP TOM1 Tomato 13.4k cDNA microarray

CITATIONS
S. Zhou, S. Wei, B. Boone and S. Levy. Microarray analysis of genes affected by salt stress in tomato. African Journal of Environmental Science and Technology Vol.1(2), pp. 014-026, September 2007

