TITLE
Breast cancer risk factors are associated with DNA methylation in non-diseased breast tissue independent of cell type

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The underlying biology through which established breast cancer risk factors contribute to disease risk is not well characterized. One key risk factor for breast cancer is age, and age-related DNA methylation alterations may contribute to increased risk of disease. Here we assessed normal breast tissues and tested the relation of DNA methylation with known breast cancer risk factors. Cancer-free women donated breast tissue biopsy specimens through the Susan G. Komen Foundation and provided detailed risk factor data (n=100). Bisulfite modified DNA was profiled for DNA methylation genome-wide using the Infinium 450K DNA methylation array. We tested the relation of known breast cancer risk factors such as age, BMI, parity, and family history of disease with DNA methylation adjusted for variation in cell type proportions using a novel cellular mixture deconvolution algorithm. We identified 787 CpGs that exhibited significant (FDR adjusted, q-value < 0.01) differential DNA methylation associated with subject age, but not with other breast cancer risk factors. We observed an enrichment among the risk factor-related CpGs for Polycomb group target genes (Fisher’s Exact test, P = 1.74E-06), and breast myoepithelial cell enhancer regions (H3K4me1; Fisher’s Exact test, P = 7.1E-20). We validated our risk factor-related findings in two independent populations of normal breast tissue (n=18 and n=97). In addition, age-related CpGs were further deregulated in both pre-invasive (DCIS, n=40) and invasive breast cancers (TCGA, n=731). Overall, our results suggest that the breast cancer risk factor age contributes to epigenetic dysregulation in normal breast tissue that exhibit progressive changes in cancer.

DESIGN
Bisulfite converted DNA from 100 healthy breast biopsy samples that were hybridised to the Illumina Infinium 450K Human Methylation beadchip

PLATFORM
GPL13534 Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (HumanMethylation450_15017482)

CITATIONS
28693600

