TITLE
Global tanscriptome analysis in Oryza sativa identifies genes regulated by copper in the medium

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa

SUMMARY
Higher plants have developed sophisticated mechanisms to efficiently acquire and use micronutrients such as copper and iron. In the present work, we studied effects produced by the presence of a wide copper range in growth media and altered copper transport on iron homeostasis in Oryza sativa plants. The global analysis of gene expression in the rice seedlings grown under copper deficiency versus excess in the medium showed an increased expression of the genes involved in iron homeostasis. Different iron-related genes are expressed under either copper deficiency and excess, such as those that encode ferredoxin and transcriptional regulator IRON-RELATED TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 2 (OsIRO2), respectively. As expected, the expression of OsCOPT1, which encodes a high affinity copper transport protein, was up-regulated under copper deficiency, and the expression of OsIRO2 targets were increased under copper excess. Arabidopsis COPT1 overexpression (C1OE) in rice causes root shortening under copper excess, modifies the expression of the putative Fe-sensing factor HEMERYTHRIN MOTIF-CONTAINING REALLY INTERESTING NEW GENE- AND ZINC-FINGER (OsHRZ1) and enhances the expression of OsIRO2 and its targets, which suggests a role of copper in iron signaling. Our studies conducted under simultaneous copper and iron deficiencies indicate that C1OE plants are more sensitive than the wild-type controls to root growth inhibition. The C1OE rice plants grown on soil contained higher endogenous iron concentration in grains than the wild-type plants (both brown and white grains). The results obtained herein showed the interaction between homeostatic networks of iron and copper, and suggest that strategies to obtain crops with optimized nutrient concentrations in edible parts should take into account this interaction.

DESIGN
8-day-old O. sativa seedlings were used to perform a global gene expression analysis by DNA microarrays. Two different Cu concentration conditions were compared, slight Cu deficiency (0 µM CuSO4) and Cu excess (75 µM CuSO4). Four independent biological replicates of each condition (½MS and ½MS + 75 µM CuSO4) were employed. Each biological replicate was labeled with Cy3 and Cy5 to produce four pairs of replicate dye-swaps, which were used for microarray hybridization.

PLATFORM
GPL8756 Arizona_Rice_45K_array

CITATIONS
28631167

