TITLE
Preferential Epigenetic Programming of Estrogen Response after in utero xenoestrogen (bisphenol-A) exposure [NimbleGen]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Bisphenol-A (BPA) is an environmentally ubiquitous estrogen-like endocrine-disrupting compound. Exposure  toBPAin utero hasbeen linked tofemale reproductive disorders, including endometrial hyperplasiaandbreast  cancer. Estrogens are an etiological factor in many of these conditions. We sought to determine whether in utero  exposure to BPA altered the globalCpGmethylation pattern of the uterine genome, subsequent gene expression, and  estrogen response.Pregnantmicewere exposed to an environmentally relevant dose of BPAorDMSOcontrol.Uterine  DNAand RNAwere examined by usingmethylatedDNAimmunoprecipitationmethylation microarray, expression  microarray, and quantitative PCR. In utero BPA exposure altered the global CpG methylation profile of the uterine  genome and subsequent gene expression. The effect on gene expression was not apparent until sexual maturation,  which suggested that estrogen response was the primary alteration. Indeed, prenatal BPA exposure preferentially  altered adult estrogen-responsive gene expression. Changes in estrogen response were accompanied by altered  methylation that preferentially affected estrogen receptor-a (ERa)–binding genes. The majority of genes that demonstrated  both altered expression and ERa binding had decreased methylation. BPA selectively altered the normal  developmental programming of estrogen-responsive genes via modification of the genes that bind ERa. Gene–  environment interactions driven by early life xenoestrogen exposure likely contributes to increased risk of estrogenrelateddisease  in adults.—Jorgensen, E. M.,Alderman,M.H., III,Taylor, H. S. Preferential epigenetic programmingof  estrogen response after in utero xenoestrogen (bisphenol-A) exposure.

DESIGN
Dams were exposed to 5 mg/kg/day BPA or DMSO control for day 9-21 of pregnancy. Offspring were euthenized at 2 weeks and their uteri harvested. Samples are pooled by litter.

PLATFORM
GPL18163 NimbleGen Mouse DNA Methylation 3x720K CpG Island Plus RefSeq Promoter Array [090618_MM9_CpG_Refseq_Prom_MeDIP]

CITATIONS
27312807

