TITLE
Epimutations as a novel cause of congenital disorders

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The application of genome sequencing in patients with intellectual disability and congenital anomalies (ID/CA) typically identifies causative mutations only in a minority of cases. We hypothesized that some cases of ID/CA are caused by epigenetic aberrations that dysregulate normal genome function, and that these would be missed by conventional sequencing approaches. We performed Illumina 450k DNA methylation profiling in ~500 individuals with ID/CA, who were negative for causative mutations by microarray, exome- and/or whole genome sequencing. We screened patient methylation profiles for epimutations absent in ~1,500 controls, and validated these by bisulfite sequencing, revealing that epimutations represent large methylation changes specifically on one allele. Parental studies show that approximately half represent de novo events, a rate significantly higher than that seen in controls. We identified seven recurrent events, two of which (FMR1, MEG3) have known disease associations, validating our method for detecting pathogenic epimutations. From large-scale sequencing, population and expression studies we conclude that epimutations are: (i) Frequently associated with extreme outlier and mono-allelic gene expression, with an impact comparable to loss-of-function mutations; (ii) Generally conserved across multiple tissues within an individual, validating the use of blood DNA to study ID/CA; (iii) Can occur secondary to cis-linked regulatory mutations, providing a rationale for interpreting non-coding genetic variants; (iv) Occur sporadically with a remarkably high de novo rate, and (v) Exhibit non-Mendelian inheritance, likely being reset between generations by epigenetic reprogramming during embryogenesis. We conclude that epimutations underlie 5-10% of patients with ID/CA who are refractory to conventional mutation screening, and propose that epigenome profiling represents a promising method for the study of human disease that complements sequence-based approaches.

DESIGN
Samples were selected based on an abnormal clinical phenotype, and an absence of likely pathogenic mutations detected in previous genetic testing, including karyotype and/or array CGH, exome sequencing, or whole genome sequencing. Illumina 450k DNA methylation profiling was performed in 489 individuals with ID/CA. In addition, we also profiled 17 mothers, 17 fathers and 97 unaffected siblings of these probands.

PLATFORM
GPL13534 Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (HumanMethylation450_15017482)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

