TITLE
Prolonged intra-neutrophil survival as an adaptive strategy of Staphylococcus aureus USA300 to the hospital environment

ORGANISM
Staphylococcus aureus subsp. aureus USA300

SUMMARY
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is a serious human pathogen that causes both hospital- and community-associated infections. In recent years, community-associated MRSA lineages have been introduced also into hospitals, which raises the question whether and, if so, how they are adapting to this new environment. The aim of the present study was to investigate the possible adaptation of a set of closely related clinical MRSA isolates of the USA300 lineage to the hospital environment. To this end, six community- and six hospital-associated USA300 isolates were analyzed. As shown in a zebrafish infection model, their overall virulence was highly similar. RNA sequencing revealed the differential expression of 208 genes in the community- and hospital-associated isolates, relating to major virulence factors, stress responses and the histidine, purine, pyrimidine and fatty acid biosynthetic pathways. Of note, most differences in the expression of virulence factors are correlated to differential regulation of the agr quorum-sensing system. Since these differentially regulated virulence factors included leukotoxins and phenol-soluble modulins, we investigated the killing of and escape from human neutrophils. The results show that the community-associated isolates have the highest neutrophil-killing activity, while the hospital-associated isolates are better adapted to intra-neutrophil survival. Importantly, the latter trait protects internalized staphylococci against an external challenge with antibiotics. Together, our findings imply that the investigated hospital-associated isolates have optimized the expression of their virulence genes for intra-neutrophil survival, improving their fitness in the hospital setting where antibiotic pressure is high.

DESIGN
12 bacterial isolates were grown in duplicate.  Samples were collected for RNA isolation from each replicates both from exponentially and stationary growing cells resulting in a total of 24 samples.

PLATFORM
GPL17544 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Staphylococcus aureus subsp. aureus USA300)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
