TITLE
Oncolytic reactivation of KSHV as a therapeutic approach for primary effusion lymphoma: RNA-sequencing of PEL cell lines during KSHV reactivation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) is an aggressive subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma caused by Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus infection, which is most commonly seen in HIV-positive patients. Induction of HIV reactivation by external stimuli in the presence of highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) has been examined for its efficacy to eradicate latently infected HIV. Similary, lytic activation of viruses from latently infected tumor cells with anti-cancer drugs represents an effective strategy of anti-neoplastic therapy, through the induction of oncolysis by viral replication, stimulation of immune responses to the viral lytic antigens, and intrinsic effects of cancer drugs. Here we examined the combination of PEP005 with epigenetic drugs as a rational therapeutic strategy to target both in AIDS-associated KSHV-mediated malignancies. JQ1, a bromodomain and extra terminal protein (BET) inhibitor, in combination with a FDA-approved drug, PEP005, not only robustly induced KSHV lytic replication, but also inhibited IL-6 and VEGF production from PEL cells. This combination has been proposed for use in reactivation of HIV from latently infected T-cells, and the same combination and dosage inhibited PEL growth in vitro and delayed tumor growth in a PEL xenograft tumor model. Downstream activation of NF-B by PEP005 combined with sequestration of bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) by JQ1 robustly increased occupancy of RNA polymerase II onto the KSHV genome. RNA-sequencing analysis further revealed cellular targets of PEP005, JQ1, and the synergistic effects of both. We suggest that the combination of PEP005 with JQ1 should be considered as a rational therapeutic approach for HIV-associated PEL.

DESIGN
A total of 12 samples were analyzed in this study. The study included three primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) cell lines, BC3, BCBL-1, HBL-6. Individual cultures of each cell line were cultured in medium containing vehicle control (DMSO), JQ1, PEP005, or the combination (JQ1 + PEP005). Following treatment of the cells for 24 hours, total RNA was isolated and then submitted fro RNA-sequencing analysis.

PLATFORM
GPL20301 Illumina HiSeq 4000 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
