TITLE
Molecular profiling of human bone marrow and adipose tissue-derived stromal cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Bone marrow (BM) has been considered so far the reference source for stromal cells (SC) originally called mesenchymal stem cells. Recently human adult adipose tissue (AT) has been reported as a valuable source for the isolation of cells exerting a mesenchymal-like phenotype. Though both BM- and AT- derived stromal cells (BMSC and ATSC) share similar immuno-phenotype and exhibit multi-lineage potential in vitro, a consensual panel of specific markers is still debated and the precise molecular mechanisms governing their differentiated fate are not fully understood. The aim of this study was to compare the genome wide expression profiles of stromal cells isolated from AT and BM and to emphasize the core of MSC stemness properties. Moreover we focused on the molecular characteristics of ATSC, attempting to reveal their specific features.We identified an overlapping dataset of 190 genes commonly regulated by ATSC and BMSC. Among these, we were able to categorize 6 key biological families that could be regarded as a stemness signature  that underlie the self-renewal potential and the ability to generate progenitor cells. In particular, a pivotal role of signalling pathways along with the expression of numerous transcription regulators emerged from this study. Genes specifically modulated in ATSC, suggested that these cells posses anti-oxidative and neuroprotective properties. Taken together, these results provide new hints towards the understanding of the molecular basis  of MSC maintenance and suggest that ATSC have interesting properties which could be useful for several potential clinical applications. Keywords: genomic profiling

DESIGN
Bone marrow and adipose tissue samples were respectively obtained from four long-term disease-free Hodgkin lymphoma patients, during follow-up investigation and from four patients subjected to partial abdominoplasty. In addition, we used in this study a cell line (MRC-5 cells) as control to rule out genes involved in homeostasis and emphasize genes specifically expressed in both types of mesenchymal stem cells. To have results statistically significant, we enrolled four patients for each tissue (4 chips/tissue) and we performed a technical replicate (triplicate) for the MRC-5 cells.

PLATFORM
GPL201 [HG-Focus] Affymetrix Human HG-Focus Target Array

CITATIONS
20849362

