TITLE
High altitude adaptation of Tibetans

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Since their arrival in the Tibetan Plateau during the Neolithic Age, Tibetans have been well-adapted to extreme  environmental conditions and possess genetic variation that reflect their living environment and migratory history. To  investigate the origin of Tibetans and the genetic basis of adaptation in a rigorous environment, we genotyped 30 Tibetan  individuals with more than one million SNP markers. Our findings suggested that Tibetans, together with the Yi people,  were descendants of Tibeto-Burmans who diverged from ancient settlers of East Asia. The valleys of the Hengduan  Mountain range may be a major migration route. We also identified a set of positively-selected genes that belong to  functional classes of the embryonic, female gonad, and blood vessel developments, as well as response to hypoxia. Most of  these genes were highly correlated with population-specific and beneficial phenotypes, such as high infant survival rate and  the absence of chronic mountain sickness. Genetic features of Tibetans have been broadly investigated, but the properties of copy number variation (CNV) have not  been well examined. To get a preliminary view of CNV in Tibetans, we scanned 29 Tibetan genomes with the Illumina  Human-1 M high-resolution genotyping microarray and identified 139 putative copy number variable regions (CNVRs),  consisting of 70 deletions, 61 duplications, and 8 multi-allelic loci. Thirty-four of the 139 CNVRs showed differential allele  frequencies versus other East-Asian populations, with P values ,0.0001. These results indicated a distinct pattern of CNVR  allele frequency distribution in Tibetans. The Tibetan CNVRs are enriched for genes in the disease class of human  reproduction (such as genes from the DAZ, BPY2, CDY, and HLA-DQ and -DR gene clusters) and biological process categories  of ‘‘response to DNA damage stimulus’’ and ‘‘DNA repair’’ (such as RAD51, RAD52, and MRE11A). These genes are related to  the adaptive traits of high infant birth weight and darker skin tone of Tibetans, and may be attributed to recent local  adaptation. Our results provide a different view of genetic diversity in Tibetans and new insights into their high-altitude  adaptation.

DESIGN
30 samples were investigate

PLATFORM
GPL6984 Illumina Human1M-Duov3 DNA Analysis BeadChip (Human1M-Duov3_B)

CITATIONS
22844521 , 21386899

