TITLE
Exosomal microRNAs in the giant panda (Ailuropoda melanoleuca) breast milk: the potential maternal regulators for the development of newborn cubs

ORGANISM
Ailuropoda melanoleuca ; Bambusa vulgaris

SUMMARY
Purpose:To present the miRNA expression profiles in giant panda milk exosomes across five lactation stages (0, 3, 7, 15 and 30 days after birth), aiming to provide new information for investigations into the physiological functions of the giant panda milk Methods: Three females were sampled in all, and each individual were sampled over multiple lactations, including 0, 3, 7, 15 and 30 days after delivery. Breast milk samples (5-10 ml) were collected from each stages. Total RNA isolated from individuals in five lactation stages (0, 7, 15 and 30 days after delivery) were pooled in equal quantities for each stage Results: Here, we illustrated the species and expression characteristics of exosome-loaded miRNAs existing in giant panda breast milk during distinct lactation periods, and highlighted the enrichment of immune- and development-related endogenous miRNAs in colostral and mature giant panda milk, which are stable even in certain hash conditions, like low pH and high concentration of RNAase, by the protection of extracellular vesicles.These findings indicate that breast milk may allow dietary intake of maternal miRNAs by infants for the regulation of postnatal development. We also demonstrated that the exogenous plant miRNA from the primary food source of giant panda (bamboo) were detected in the exosomes of giant panda breast milk, which were predicted to be of regulatory role in basic cell metabolism and neuron development. This result suggested that the dietary plant miRNAs were able to be absorbed by host cell and then secreted to body fluids as potential cross-kingdom regulators. Conclusions: Exosomal miRNAs in the giant panda breast milk may be the crucial maternal regulators for the development of intrinsic ‘slink’ newborn cubs.

DESIGN
Three females were sampled in all, and each individual were sampled over multiple lactations, including 0, 3, 7, 15 and 30 days after delivery. Breast milk samples (5-10 ml) were collected from each stages. Total RNA isolated from individuals in five lactation stages (0, 7, 15 and 30 days after delivery) were pooled in equal quantities for each stage.

PLATFORM
GPL22660 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Bambusa vulgaris) GPL22661 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Ailuropoda melanoleuca)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

