TITLE
Stability of the human sperm DNA methylome to folic acid fortification and short-term supplementation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Study question:  Do short-term and long-term exposures to low dose folic acid supplementation alter DNA methylation in sperm? Summary answer:  No alterations in sperm DNA methylation patterns were found following the administration of low dose folic acid supplements of 400 μg/day for 90 days (short-term exposure) or when pre-fortification of food with folic acid and post-fortification sperm samples (long-term exposure) were compared. What is known already:  Excess dietary folate may be detrimental to health and DNA methylation profiles due to folate’s role in one carbon metabolism and the formation of S-adenosyl methionine, the universal methyl donor.  DNA methylation patterns are established in developing male germ cells and have been suggested to be affected by high dose (5 mg/day) folic acid supplementation. Participants/materials, setting, methods:  Blood and seminal plasma folate levels were measured in participants before and following the 90-day treatment with placebo or supplement.  Sperm DNA methylation was assessed using the whole genome and genome-wide techniques, MassArray epityper, restriction landmark genomic scanning, methyl-CpG immunoprecipitation and Illumina HumanMethylation450 Bead Array. Main results and the role of chance:  Following treatment, supplemented individuals had significantly higher levels of blood and seminal plasma folates compared to placebo. Initial first generation genome-wide analyses of sperm DNA methylation showed little evidence of changes when comparing pre- and post-treatment samples.  With Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip arrays, no significant changes were observed in individual probes following low-level supplementation; when compared with those of the post-fortification cohort, there were also few differences in methylation despite exposure to years of fortified foods. Limitations, reasons for caution:  This study was limited to the number of participants available in each cohort, in particular those who were not exposed to early (pre-1998) fortification of food with folic acid.  While genome-wide DNA methylation was assessed with several techniques that targeted genic and CpG rich regions, intergenic regions were less well interrogated. Wider implications of the findings:  Overall, our findings provide evidence that short term exposure to low dose folic acid supplements of 400 μg/day, over a period of 3 months, a duration of time that might occur during infertility treatments, has no major impact on the sperm DNA methylome.

DESIGN
Study design, size, duration:  This is a control versus treatment study where genome-wide sperm DNA methylation patterns were examined prior to fortification of food (1996-1997) in men with no history of infertility at baseline and following 90-day exposure to placebo (n=9) or supplement containing 400 μg folic acid/day (n=10).  Additionally, pre-fortification sperm DNA methylation profiles (n=19) were compared with those of a group of post-fortification (post-2004) men (n=8) who had been exposed for several years to dietary folic acid fortification.

PLATFORM
GPL13534 Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (HumanMethylation450_15017482)

CITATIONS
27994001

