TITLE
Comparison of the functional microRNA expression in immune cell subsets of neonates and adults

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Diversity of biological molecules in newborn and adult immune cells contributes to differences in cell function and atopic properties. Micro RNAs (miRNAs) are reported involve in the regulation of immune system. Therefore, determining the miRNA expression profile of leukocyte sub-populations is important for understanding immune system regulation. In order to explore the unique microRNA profiling that contribute to altered immune in neonates, we comprehensively analyzed the functional miRNA signatures of eight leukocyte subsets (polymorphonuclear cells, monocytes, CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, natural killer cells, B cells, plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), and myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs)) from both neonatal and adult umbilical cord and peripheral blood samples, respectively. We observed distinct miRNA profiles between adult and neonatal blood leukocyte subsets, including unique miRNA signatures for each cell lineage. Leukocyte miRNA signatures were altered after stimulation. Adult peripheral leukocytes had higher let-7b-5p expression levels compared to neonatal cord leukocytes across multiple subsets, irrespective of stimulation. Transfecting neonatal monocytes with a let-7b-5p mimic resulted in a reduction of LPS-induced IL-6 and TNF-a production, while transfection of a let-7b-5p inhibitor into adult monocytes enhanced IL-6 and TNF-a production. With this functional approach, we provide intact differential microRNA expression profiling of specific immune cell subsets between neonates and adults. These studies serve as a basis to further understand the altered immune response observed in neonates and advance the development of therapeutic strategies

DESIGN
we set out to comprehensively analyze the miRNA expression signatures of eight leukocyte subsets (polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs), monocytes, CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells natural killer (NK) cells, B cells, pDCs, and myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs)) between neonatal and adult samples.

PLATFORM
GPL18044 Agilent-046064 Unrestricted_Human_miRNA_V19.0_Microarray (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

