TITLE
Activated entomopathogenic nematode infective juveniles release lethal venom proteins

ORGANISM
Steinernema carpocapsae

SUMMARY
Entomopathogenic nematodes (EPNs) are unique parasitic nematodes due to their symbiosis with entomopathogenic bacteria and their ability to kill insect hosts quickly after infection. Although it has been widely believed that EPNs rely on their bacterial partners for killing insect hosts, compelling evidence from previous studies challenges this model. We developed an improved method of activating millions of Steinernema carpocapsae infective juveniles (IJs) in vitro to harvest excreted/secreted (ES) proteins for bioactivity tests and proteomics analysis. We found that a low dose of the ES proteins from early activated nematodes is lethal to Drosophila melanogaster adults within 2-6 hours. We analyzed the protein composition of this venom using mass spectrometry and identified 472 proteins. Many of these venom proteins share high homology with those of vertebrate-parasitic nematodes. Among many different families of proteins found in the venom, proteases and protease inhibitors are especially abundant. Some toxin-related proteins such as Shk domain-containing proteins were also detected. We further analyzed the transcriptomes of individual non-activated IJs and nematodes that were activated in vitro and in vivo, which revealed a dramatic shift in gene expression during IJ activation. By comparing the whole transcriptomes and the genes encoding venom proteins between the in vitro and in vivo activated nematodes, we confirmed that the in vitro activation is a good approximation of the in vivo process. In summary, our findings strongly support a new model that S. carpocapsae and likely other Steinernema EPNs have a more active role in contributing to the pathogenicity of the nematode-bacterium complex than simply relying on their symbiotic bacteria. Furthermore, we propose that EPNs are a good model system for investigating vertebrate- and human-parasitic nematodes, especially regarding the function of ES products.

DESIGN
We analyzed the transcriptomes (RNA-seq) of individual non-activated IJs and IJs that were activated in vivo (dissected from the insect Galleria mellonella) and in vitro (IJs were collected from a sponge soaked in G. mellonella hemolymph).

PLATFORM
GPL20152 Illumina NextSeq 500 (Steinernema carpocapsae)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

