TITLE
Cell-type-specific gene expression profiling using ribosome affinity purification

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Post-transcriptional regulation including mRNA binding to ribosomes plays an important role in determining cell-type-specific gene expression patterns. Here, we applied an approach that profiles cell-type-specific mRNAs. The Translating Ribosome Affinity Purification method (TRAP; Heiman et al., Cell, 2008 and Doyle et al., Cell, 2008) was developed in mice and has been combined with the UAS/Gal4 system in Drosophila (Thomas et al., PLoS ONE, 2012). TRAP is a powerful method to find cell-type-specific differences at the level of the 'translatome' (Dougherty, Schmidt, Nakajima, & Heintz, Nucleic Acids Research, 2010). In parallel to published efforts, we developed and implemented the method for the fly and compared distinct head cell types and identified cell-type-specific transcript classes with neuronal (e.g. receptor-, neuropeptide- or hormone activity) or glial function (e.g. transporter activity). Neuronal TRAP genes are over-represented in the brain, larval CNS and thoracico-abdominal ganglion (Chintapalli, Wang, & Dow, Nature Genetics, 2007). Using cell-type-to-cell-type comparisons (e.g. neurons vs. glia), instead of a given cell population to the total (e.g. neurons vs. head), the differences could be identified with greater resolution. TRAP uncovered more neuronal genes compared to neuronal RNA polymerase II ChIP-seq data (Schauer et al., Cell Reports, 2013). Thus, TRAP data confirm the importance of post-transcriptional regulation in defining cell identity. TRAP is one of the best methods to reveal differential " omics " data among distinct cell types by profiling ribosome-bound mRNAs. TRAP is a promising tool to reveal cell-type-specific transcriptional and translational changes in a perturbed environment.

DESIGN
This dataset contains cell-type-specific ribosome-bound mRNA-seq profiles. Input and IP samples from Drosophila adult head neurons, glia and fat body.

PLATFORM
GPL13304 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Drosophila melanogaster)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

