TITLE
NF-κB Activation Controls Phagolysosome Fusion-Mediated killing of Mycobacteria by Macrophages

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Mycobacterium smegmatis is a model non-pathogenic mycobacterium that is efficiently killed by macrophages. Here, we explore the role of NF-κB in the innate immune response, focusing in detail on the mechanisms of the first killing period (1-4h) of M. smegmatis which coincides with phagosome-lysosome fusion. We show that infection of macrophages with M. smegmatis induces an activation of NF-κB and this activation is required for killing since treatment of macrophages with NF-κB inhibitors or siRNA silencing of the NF-κB subunit p65 increases bacterial survival. NF-κB induced proteins were thus hypothesized to be essential during the first phase of M. smegmatis killing. We therefore identified, using RNA microarray, the genes that were regulated during infection in the absence and presence of NF-κB inhibitors. By subtraction this provided a list of pro-inflammatory proteins that were under the control of NF-κB and putatively involved in the killing response. Among these category of genes were those for lysosomal enzymes and membrane trafficking regulators, including Cathepsins, LAMP-2 and Rab34, are regulated by NF-κB. Moreover, inhibition of NF-κB signaling retarded the delivery of v-ATPase, LAMP-2, CtsZ and CtsH thereby impairing the maturation of mycobacterial phagosomes. Collectively; our data provide the first compelling evidence that the innate immune response via NF-κB activation is linked to phagosome fusion with lysosomes that is essential for killing of mycobacteria. Keywords: NFkB inhibitor treated vs untreated

DESIGN
The study includes J774 macrophage cell lines which are infected with Mycobacterium smegmatis in the presence and absense of NFkB inhibitor SC-514.Total RNA was isolated from individual samples and each sample was hybridised to CodeLink Mouse whole genome bioarray slides.This study was intended to know the role of NFkB regulated genes in killing non-pathogenic mycobacteria during 4 hour post infection of macrophages.

PLATFORM
GPL5825 EMBL30807 (GE Healthcare/Amersham Mouse Whole Genome Bioarray)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

