TITLE
Phenotypic, genomic and transcriptional analysis of Zymomonas mobilis ZM4 mutants with enhanced ethanol tolerance

ORGANISM
Zymomonas mobilis subsp. mobilis ZM4 = ATCC 31821

SUMMARY
Background: Growth in the global population and industrial activities has increased world energy consumption. Bioethanol is considered as an alternative renewable energy source. Among various ethanol-producing microbes, Zymomonas mobilis ZM4 has received special attention due to its higher ethanol yield and tolerance. Advances in genetic engineering are particularly important for developing microorganisms with improved ethanol production. However, the variety of factors involved in the response to high concentrations of ethanol makes it difficult to devise genetic engineering strategies to generate alcohol tolerant strains. For a better understanding of the ethanol tolerance phenomenon, we obtained and characterized two Z. mobilis ZM4 mutants (ER79ap and ER79ag) with increased ethanol tolerance. Results: Mutants were obtained using a strain adaptive evolution method in mini-fermentors and sequential transfers to higher ethanol concentrations. Mutations were identified by Illumina genomic sequencing. Strain ER79ap possesses three point mutations in the following genes: SpoT/RelA, which synthesizes and degrades the alarmone ppGpp; clpB, encoding a disgregase; and clpP, a component of the Clp protease. In contrast, strain ER79ag has four mutations in the subsequent genes: spoT/relA; rimO; clpP; and in a gene encoding a hypothetical protein with a CBS domain. Transcript profiles of ZM4 and ER79ap were obtained with microarray analysis and identified 126 genes in ZM4 and 148 genes in ER79ap that were differentially expressed in response to ethanol. Conclusions: Both mutants carry mutations in clpP and relA/spoT genes, suggesting that these genes are responsible of their enhanced ethanol tolerance. Transcript profile analysis of the ZM4 and ER79ap showed that they share a set of forty genes that are differentially expressed under ethanol stress and this set may correspond to those that are crucial for the ethanol response.  The expression profiles indicate that ethanol induces a major reprograming of transcription that involves changes in the cell membrane, protein synthesis, and in some metabolic pathways, especially those involved in the amino acid metabolism. Our data suggest that clpP and in particular the relA/spoT gene can be targets for bioengineering ethanol tolerance.

DESIGN
Two-condition experiment, ZM4 in the presence or absence of  ethanol and the mutant ER79ap in the presence or absence of ethanol. For both experimets we reported three biological replicates and three thecnical replicates

PLATFORM
GPL22693 Phenotypic, genomic and transcriptional analysis of Zymomonas mobilis ZM4 mutants with enhanced ethanol tolerance

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

