TITLE
Acute toxicity, bioaccumulation and effects of dietary transfer of silver from brine shrimps exposed to PVP/PEI-coated silver nanoparticles to zebrafish

ORGANISM
Danio rerio

SUMMARY
Silver nanoparticles (NPs) are extensively used due to their antimicrobial activity and, therefore, their input into the ecosystem will increase. Silver can be bioaccumulated by low trophic level organisms and, then, incorporated into the food chain, reaching high level predators. The objectives of this study were to test the acute toxicity of N-vynil-2-pirrolidone/polyethylenimine (PVP-PEI) coated Ag NPs of 5 nm to brine shrimp (Artemia sp) larvae and to assess bioaccumulation and effects of silver transferred by the diet. For the later, brine shrimps were exposed to two different concentrations of Ag NPs, 100 ng/L as an environmentally relevant concentration and 100 µg/L as a likely effective concentration, in parallel with an unexposed control group and, then, used to feed zebrafish during 21 days in order to simulate two trophic levels of a simplified food web. For brine shrimp larvae, EC50 values ranged from 7.39 mg Ag/L (48 h post hatch larvae (hph) exposed for 48 h) to 19.63 mg Ag/L (24 hph larvae exposed for 24 h. Silver accumulation was measured in brine shrimps exposed to 0.1 and 1 mg/L of Ag NPs for 24 h. In zebrafish fed with brine shrimps exposed to Ag NPs, intestine showed higher metal accumulation than liver, although both organs presented the same pattern of dose and time-dependent metal accumulation as revealed by autometallography. Feeding of zebrafish for 3 days with brine shrimps exposed to 100 ng/L of Ag NPs was enough to impair fish health as reflected by the significant reduction of the lysosomal membrane stability and the presence of several histopathological conditions in the liver. Overall, results showed that Ag NPs were able to exert toxic effects on zebrafish through dietary exposure, even at an environmentally relevant concentration, which should act as concern of the need of studies in further detail about real impact of nanomaterials in the environment.

DESIGN
20 samples per group, 5 replicates (4 liver or 4 intestine per replicate), 2 groups x 2 times, control and C1 (0.1 mg/L) of Ag NPs, 3 and 21 days of exposure

PLATFORM
GPL14664 Agilent-026437 D. rerio (Zebrafish) Oligo Microarray V3 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
28323199

