TITLE
Genome-wide analysis of early mouse development.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Throughout the course of early development, the reliable occurrence of stereotyped events is imperative. This careful orchestration is dependent upon regulation at the level of gene expression. While all cell types derive from a single fertilized cell and share a single genome, individual cell types differentially utilize this genome. Such differential utilization is essential for the acquisition, maintenance, and modulation of cell properties. In order to better understand the molecular basis of early development, we evaluated the mRNA expression programs of both early post-implantation mouse embryos and differentiating embryonic stem cells using a cDNA microarray platform covering 74% of the mouse genome. Mining of these datasets revealed a strong association across RNA processing, modulation of the cell cycle, and chromatin organization. Genes involved in these processes demonstrated sharp regulation during well-defined biological transitions. Dominant patterns of expression with biologically separable properties were identified. The evolutionary conservation of one cluster in particular suggested a molecular basis for the alignment of the murine and fly developmental programs. Moreover, the data suggest putative gene relationships that may also have broader implications for gene networks connecting the cell cycle to the molecular repertoire of the cell. Design: Dataset is a murine embryonic developmental timecourse consisting of morphologically staged samples from E6.25 to E9.0 (at approximately 0.25d intervals). There two replicates of each sample and there are 13 samples in each biological replicate series. A common reference design was employed. A development or differentiation experiment design type assays events associated with development or differentiation or moving through a life cycle. Development applies to organism(s) acquiring a mature state, and differentiation applies to cells acquiring specialized functions. Developmental Stage: morphologically staged samples from E6.25 to E9.0 (at approximately 0.25d intervals) Keywords: development_or_differentiation_design

DESIGN
Using regression correlation

PLATFORM
GPL3387 MMV GPL5864 MMX

CITATIONS
18061570

