TITLE
Stathmin overexpression cell and control cell gene expression analysis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Purpose: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is a serious malignant tumor, it affects human health. We analyzed the correlation between serum Stathmin levels and ESCC, further elucidated the molecular mechanisms how Stathmin promotes ESCC cell invasion and metastasis. Methods: Stathmin levels in ESCC and healthy control serum was detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and analyzed the clinical parameters. We established ESCC cells with Stathmin overexpression or knockdown, next evaluated the effects of Stathmin on invasion, metastasis and proliferation in ESCC.  The expression levels of the integrin family, focal adhesion kinase (FAK) protein and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) were detected by immunoblotting. Results: Serum levels of Stathmin were significantly higher in ESCC and associated with lymph node metastasis, tumor stage and size. Furthermore, we found Stathmin promotes migration, invasion and proliferation of ESCC cells in vitro and in vivo. Further study confirmed that the activation of integrinα5β1/FAK/ERK pathway is increased in Stathmin overexpression cells, this pathway contribute to strengthen cell adhesion. Stathmin accelerates the cell motility by enhancing cell adhesion ability. Conclusion: Stathmin may be a potential biomarker for ESCC clinical detection, and it can promotes ESCC cell invasion and metastasis through the integrinα5β1/FAK/ERK pathway. The differentially expressed genes were analyzed by Human Transcriptome Array, and confirmed by RT-PCR.

DESIGN
Stathmin overexpression cell and control cell gene expression analysis each contain two biology repeat. Sample 1 and sample 3 represent stathmin overexpression cell, sample 2 and sample 4 represent control cell.

PLATFORM
GPL20265 [HTA-2_0] Affymetrix Human Transcriptome Array 2.0 [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

