TITLE
Identification of signaling pathways modulated by kiaa0101 in HepG2 cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Kiaa0101 (p15PAF) was previously observed overexpressed in hepatocelluler carcinoma tissues and promoted tumorigenesis. In order to identify potential biological pathways modulated by Kiaa0101, a lentivirus vector with Kiaa0101 was  constructed and transfected into an HepG2 cell  line to obtain a stable cell line with high expression of Kiaa0101. Interestingly, all the protein levels of P21, phosphorylated P21, Akt and phosphorylated Akt were induced. Further, gene expression profiles of Kiaa0101 overexpressed hepatocelluler cancer cells were analyzed using the DNA microarray technique. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were screened and followed by Gene Ontology (GO) function and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis. 1361 genes and 942 genes were upregulated and downregulated, respectively. The most represented enriched GO biological process, cellular component and molecular function categories included DNA-dependent regulation of transcripton, plasma membrane and DNA binding, respectively. KEGG pathway analysis showed that the most significantly expressed genes were linked to pathways in cancer, MAPK signaling pathway and Wnt signaling pathway. Our study provides a comparative transcriptome analysis and revealed the downstream genes and signaling pathways that are possibly involved in Kiaa0101-induced hepatocelluler carcinoma.

DESIGN
Three kiaa0101-overexpressing stable cells and three control cells were chosen for microarray analysis. Subsequently, the RNAs were analyzed using microarray chips (Agilent Technologies) according to the manufacturer's protocol.Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG pathways were performed to investigate the involved pathways

PLATFORM
GPL17077 Agilent-039494 SurePrint G3 Human GE v2 8x60K Microarray 039381 (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

