TITLE
RNA-dependent RNA polymerases-synthesized antisense ribosomal siRNAs silence pre-rRNA via the nuclear RNAi pathway in C. elegans

ORGANISM
Caenorhabditis elegans

SUMMARY
The biogenesis of rRNA drives cell growth and proliferation, but mechanisms that modulate rRNA production remain poorly understood. We have conducted a genetic screen to look for factors that negatively regulate endo-siRNA generation in C. elegans, and identified the suppressor of siRNA (susi)-1and a new class of triphosphorylated antisense ribosomal siRNAs (risiRNAs). In susi-1 mutant, we observed an accumulation of siRNA sequences complementary to 18S and 26S rRNAs. risiRNAs are similar to 22G-RNA, as they are 22 nt in length and have a triphosphorylated guanidine at their 5'-end. The generation of risiRNAs depends on RNA-dependent RNA polymerases, but not the ERI/Dicer complex. risiRNAs act through the nuclear RNAi pathway and guide the Argonaute protein NRDE-3 to the nucleoli, which leads to a downregulation of pre-rRNA expression. Interestingly, low temperature and ultraviolet irradiation also induces the accumulation of risiRNA, suggesting potential regulatory functions. Cloned SUSI-1 shows homology to Dis3-like exonuclease 2 (Dis3L2) in other organisms, a gene identified as a key exonuclease involved in the 3' to 5' degradation of oligouridylated RNAs. We observed an accumulation of 3'-tail oligouridylated 26S rRNA in susi-1 mutant and in low temperature-treated animals. Consistently, the injection of 3'-tail oligouridylated 26S rRNA elicited a nuclear accumulation of NRDE-3. Our findings thus establish SUSI-1(ceDis3L2) as a suppressor of endo-siRNA generation, identify a novel class of risiRNAs that suppress pre-rRNA expression, and suggest a potential disease mechanism.

DESIGN
In this study, we compared (1) the small RNAs from wild type N2 animals with susi-1(R457) mutant, (2) NRDE-3-associated small RNAs in wild type animals with in eri-1 animals, (3) small RNAs in animals grow at normal temperature 20oC and animals after a 4oC cold shock; (4) small RNAs in eri-1 animals with or without UV irradiation; (5) NRDE-3-associated small RNAs with or without UV irradiation. To understant the mechanism of risiRNA biogenesis, we further investigated the accumulation of oligouridylated 26S rRNA by (6) 26S rRNA tail-seq of wild type N2 with susi-1(ust1) animals; (7) 26S rRNA tail-seq of eri-1 animals with eri-1;susi1 animals; (8) 26S rRNA tail-seq of eri-1 animals with or without 4C cold shock.

PLATFORM
GPL13657 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Caenorhabditis elegans)

CITATIONS
28165511

LIBSTRATS
:MIRNA-SEQ :NCRNA-SEQ
