TITLE
Integrated analysis of long non-coding RNAs and mRNA expression profiles in human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells reveals the potential role of lncRNAs in the pathogenesis of pulmonary artery hypertension

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNA) may play critical regulatory role in pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). In this study, we used microarray and bioinformatics analysis to find potential lncRNAs which may be useful in PAH.  Methods: Human pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells (HPASMCs) were cultured and stimulated by endothelin (ET)-1 to establish as a PAH cellular model. We examined the two cells’ status of proliferation and apoptosis, and identifying their expression patterns of lncRNAs and mRNAs via microarray analysis. Bioinformatics analysis were performed to analyze lncRNA related coding genes involved in different biological responses.   Results: After treated by ET-1, proliferation and apoptosis resistance of HPASMCs were enhanced. Microarray data showed that 1296 lncRNAs were significantly induced and 972 lncRNAs were suppressed in HPASMCs after ET-1 treatment. Meanwhile, 325 mRNAs were up-regulated and 335 mRNAs were down-regulated. Gene Ontology analysis results showed that up-regulated mRNAs were mainly involved positive regulation of angiogenesis and extracellular space, while down-regulated mRNAs were involved in low-density lipoprotein particle clearance and extracellular space. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analysis showed pathways of up-regulated mRNAs included cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and transcriptional misregulation in cancer, while down-regulated mRNAs were related to fat digestion and absorption, sphingolipid metabolism and nitrogen metabolism. The most significantly up- and down-regulated lncRNA were validated by RT-PCR. 192 differentially expressed lncRNAs were found may play cis roles for the closest differentially expressed mRNAs.  Conclusion: This preliminary study indicated that the identified aberrantly expressed genes and hub lncRNAs which might play important roles in PAH.

DESIGN
Examine the different of mRNA and lncRNA expression profiles between endothelin-1 treated and untreated human pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells

PLATFORM
GPL22755 Agilent-076500 Human lncRNA+mRNA array (Probe name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

