TITLE
Potential roles of DNA methylation in the initiation and establishment of replicative senescence revealed by array-based methylome and transcriptome analyses

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Cellular senescence is classified into two groups; replicative and premature senescence. The gene expression and epigenetic changes differ between two groups of senescence, replicative and premature senescence, and cell types.  Normal human diploid fibroblast TIG-3 cells have often been used in cellular senescence research, however, their epigenetic profiles are not fully understood. To elucidate how cellular senescence is epigenetically regulated in TIG-3 cells, we analyzed the gene expression and DNA methylation profiles of three types of senescent cells, namely, replicative senescent, ras-induced senescent (RIS), and non-permissive temperature-induced senescent SVts8 cells, using gene expression and methylation microarrays. The expression of genes involved in the cell cycle and immune response was commonly either down- or up-regulated in the three types of senescent cells, respectively. The sequential alteration of the DNA methylation level in a time-dependent manner was observed in replicatively senescent cells, but not in premature senescent cells. The integrated analysis of gene expression and methylation in replicatively senescent cells demonstrated that the expression of 759 genes involved in the cell cycle and immune response was associated with methylation. Furthermore, hypomethylation occurred in non-CpG island regions (open sea) of the genes exhibiting increased expression as well as non-CpG island promoters of the genes related to the immune response. Several miRNAs regulated through DNA methylation were found to affect the expression of their target genes. Taken together, these results indicate that DNA methylation contributes to the introduction and establishment of replicative senescence partly by regulating gene expression.

DESIGN
We examined the gene expression and epigenetic difference following senescence among three different types of senescent cells, replicative senescent, RAS-induced senescent (RIS) and senescent SVts8 cells, derived from Normal human diploid fibroblast TIG-3 cells. Gene expression, miRNA expression and genome-wide DNA methylation profiles were obtained using SurePrint G3 Human GE microarray 8×60K Ver. 2.0 (Agilent), Human miRNA V21.0 microarray (Agilent) and Infinium HumanMethylation27/450 BeadChip (Illumina), respectively.

