TITLE
Chromatin proteomics reveals novel combinatorial histone modification signatures that mark distinct subpopulations of macrophage enhancers [ChIP-seq]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The activity of enhancers and promoters fine-tunes the transcriptional program of mammalian cells through the recruitment and interplay between cell type-specific and ubiquitous transcription factors. Despite their key role in modulating transcription, the identification of enhancers is challenged by their limited sequence conservation and highly variable distance from target genes. Although enhancers are characterised by the strong enrichment of mono-methylation at lysine 4 of histone H3, mirrored by low tri-methylation at the same residue, a comprehensive list of enhancers-associated histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) is still lacking. We undertook a proteomics investigation, based on chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with mass spectrometry (MS), to identify histone marks specifically associated to cis-regulatory elements in macrophages, focusing on enhancers. We also profiled their plasticity during the transcriptional activation induced by an inflammatory stimulus. The proteomic analysis suggested novel PTM associations, which were validated by analysis of ChIP- and RNA-seq data, whose intersection revealed the existence of novel sub-populations of enhancers marked by specific signatures: the dual mark H3K4me1/K36me2 labels transcription at enhancers, whereas H3K4me1/K36me3 and H3K4me1/K79me2 tag distinct intronic enhancers. While demonstrating that analyzing restricted genomic regions can disclose the combinatorial language of histone modifications, this study highlights the potential of MS-based proteomics in addressing fundamental questions in epigenetics.

DESIGN
Chromatin immunoprecipitations of H3 lysine 4 tri- or mono-methylated, H3 lysine 27 acetylated or tri-methylated, H3 lysine 36 di- or tri-methylated or H3 lysine 79 di-methilated followed by multiparallel sequencing performed in RAW264.7 macrophage-like cell line. Experiments were carried out in cells either untreated or treated for 1h or 4 hrs with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). When indicated (FL), cells were also pre-treated for 1h with flavopiridol.

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

LIBSTRATS
:CHIP-SEQ
