TITLE
The vacuolar high affinity copper transporter COPT5 participates in the copper requirement for iron signaling in Arabidopsis Thaliana

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Iron and copper are important environmental nutrients for plant growth. However, the molecular mechanisms of both iron and copper signaling that integrate the two pathways remain poorly understood. The Arabidopsis thaliana high affinity copper transporter COPT5, is a tonoplast localized permease involved in copper remobilization. Here, a global expression microarray analysis of the copt5 mutant points out the induction of iron deficiency responses, including NATURAL RESISTANCE-ASSOCIATED MACROPHAGE PROTEIN 4 (NRAMP4), a tonoplast-localized iron transporter.  The copper requirement in iron perception and uptake from the media becomes more evident in the double nramp3nramp4 mutant, unable to remobilize iron from vacuoles, that is highly sensitive to copper deficiency. Furthermore, COPT5 expression is altered under iron deficiency and the copt5 mutant is sensitive to iron deficiency and is unable to perceive iron in the media under copper deficiency. Noteworthy, iron deficiency post-transcriptionally restraints the copper-dependent superoxide dismutase protein levels and the subsequent activity. As a consequence of its increased iron deficiency responses, the copt5 mutant present lower levels of both copper- and iron-dependent superoxide dismutase activities. Moreover, the copt5 mutant mobilizes faster its iron storage pools and presents higher levels of iron in cotyledons and seeds. These results underline the importance of internal metal pools in the understanding of copper and iron deficiency responses and their crosstalk that are critical for governing proper plant development in response to combined metal scarcities in soils.

DESIGN
12 samples form 3 biological replicates and 4 conditions (WT+Cu; C5+Cu; Wt+BCS; C5+BCS) are analyzed. Wt is Arabidopsis thaliana columbia 0 and copt5-2 knockout mutant

PLATFORM
GPL9020 Agilent-021169 Arabidopsis 4 Oligo Microarray (V4) (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

