TITLE
Human Initiator / Effector Gene Sets That Regulate Myometrial Contractility During Term and Preterm Labor

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Distinct processes govern the transition from myometrial quiescence to activation during both term and preterm labor.  We sought the specific gene sets responsible for initiating term and preterm labor, along with a core set of effector genes necessary for labor independent of gestational age and the underlying trigger. The Effector Gene Set consisted of 49 genes present in both preterm and term labor but absent from non-labor samples.  122 genes were specific to preterm labor (Preterm Initiator Set) and 229 to term labor (Term Initiator Set).  The Term Initiator and the Effector Sets reflected predominantly inflammatory processes.  Surprisingly, the Preterm Initiator Gene Set reflected molecular and biological events almost exclusive of inflammation. Preterm and term labor differ dramatically in their unique, initiator gene profiles, suggesting alternative pathways underlie these events.  Inflammatory processes are ubiquitous to the Term Initiator and the Effector Gene Sets, supporting the idea term parturition is an inflammatory process.  The absence of inflammatory processes in the Preterm Initiator Set suggests inflammation is secondary to processes triggering spontaneous preterm birth, and could explain the lack of therapeutic efficacy associated with anti inflammatory/antibiotic regimens. Keywords: myometrial gene expression, preterm versus term labor

DESIGN
Myometrial gene expression was analyzed from samples obtained at term (n=6) or preterm (n=6) with and without labor using cDNA microarrays.  Patients in preterm labor all had intra amniotic inflammation.  Gene sets were generated using logical operations within a functional mapping tool (MetaCore™, GeneGo, St. Joseph, MI).  Relevant gene sets were validated with quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
20452493

