TITLE
The Transcriptome of Photo-Biological Hydrogen Production in the Green Alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

ORGANISM
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

SUMMARY
Algal photo-bio hydrogen production, a promising method for producing clean and renewable fuel in the form of hydrogen gas, has been studied extensively over the last few decades.  In this study, microarray analyses were used to obtain a global expression profile of mRNA abundance in the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii at five different time points before the onset and during the course of sulphur depleted hydrogen production. The present work confirms previous findings on the impacts of sulphur deprivation but also provides new insights into photosynthesis, sulphur assimilation and carbon metabolism under sulphur starvation towards hydrogen production. For instance, while a general trend towards repression of transcripts encoding photosynthetic genes was observed, the abundance of Lhcbm9 (encoding a major light harvesting polypeptide) and LhcSR1 (encoding a chlorophyll binding protein) was strongly elevated throughout the experiment, suggesting remodeling of the photosystem II light harvesting complex as well as an important function of Lhcbm9 under sulphur starvation. This study presents the first global transcriptional analysis of C. reinhardtii during hydrogen production using five major time points at Peak Oxygen, Mid Oxygen, Zero Oxygen, Mid Hydrogen and Peak Hydrogen. Keywords: Time course, sulfur deprivation, hydrogen production.

DESIGN
Time course microarray analyses were used to analyze the global gene expression in sulfur depleted hydrogen producing C. reinhardtii. When depleted of sulfur, a sealed an illuminated C. reinhardtii culture slowly becomes anaerobic and produces hydrogen gas. Based on the changes in the dissolved O2 level and H2 production rate, the whole course of H2 production from the starting of S deprivation to the end of H2 production can be divided into five phases including an Aerobic Phase (I) in which the dissolved O2 level goes up (I), an O2 Consumption Phase (II), an Anaerobic Phase (III), a H2 Production Phase (IV) and a Termination phase (V). Samples were taken from three different bioreactors (biological replicates) at the following time points after the start of S depletion: 6 h, 16 h, 21 h, 37 h and 52 h corresponding to Peak O2, Mid O2, Zero O2, Mid H2 and Peak H2.

PLATFORM
GPL5914 Chlamydomonas reinhardtii Version_2 Microarray GPL6589 Chlamydomonas reinhardtii Version_2_plus Microarray

CITATIONS
18708561

