TITLE
Differential gene expression of Listeria monocytogenes during high hydrostatic pressure processing

ORGANISM
Listeria monocytogenes

SUMMARY
High hydrostatic pressure processing (HPP) is currently being used as a treatment for certain foods to control the presence of food-borne pathogens, such as Listeria monocytogenes. Genomic microarray analysis was performed to determine the effects of HPP on L. monocytogenes in order to understand how it responds to mechanical stress injury. Reverse transcriptase PCR analysis of tufB and rpoC indicated that the reduction of mRNA expression in HPP treated cells was dependent on intensity and time of the treatment. Treatments of 400 and 600 MPa for 5 min. on cells in the exponential growth phase though leading to partial or complete cellular inactivation still resulted in measurable relative differential gene expression. Gene set enrichment analysis indicated HPP induced increased expression of genes associated with DNA repair mechanisms, transcription and translation protein complexes, the septal ring, the general protein translocase system, flagella assemblage and chemotaxis, and lipid and peptidoglycan biosynthetic pathways. HPP on the other hand appears to suppress a wide range of energy production and conversion, carbohydrate metabolism, and virulence associated genes accompanied by strong suppression of the SigB and PrfA regulons. HPP also induced repression of genes negatively controlled by pleotrophic regulator CodY. HPP-induced cellular damage appears to lead to increased expression of genes linked to sections of the cell previously shown in bacteria to be damaged or altered during HPP exposure and suppression of gene expression associated with cellular growth processes and virulence. Keywords: Stress response

DESIGN
Two separate treatments were conducted one at 400 MPa (5 min) treatment with 3 biological replicates and a seond at 600 MPa (5 min) with 3 biological replicates compared. In the case of the 600 MPa (5 min) treatment two technical replicates per biological replicate were also included in the downstream data processing as mRNA levels were quite variable after this treatment as compared to the milder high pressure treatment.

PLATFORM
GPL5334 University of Tasmania Listeria monocytogenes 3K

CITATIONS
18227250

