TITLE
Facultative CTCF sites moderate mammary super-enhancer activity and regulate juxtaposed gene in non-mammary cells [ChIP-seq]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Precise spatiotemporal regulation of genetic programs, driven by cellspecific super-enhancers, is paramount for the function of cell lineages. Studies have suggested that insulated neighborhoods, formed by the zincfinger protein CTCF, sequester genes and their associated enhancers thus preventing them from trespassing on off-target genes. Although this could explain the enhancer-gene-specificity conundrum, there is limited genetic evidence that the search space of cell-specific super-enhancers is constrained by CTCF. We have addressed this question in the Wap locus with its exceptional mammary-specific super-enhancer, which is separated by five CTCF sites from neighboring genes. Three of these sites are positioned between the Wap super-enhancer and the widely expressed Ramp3. Enhancer deletions demonstrated that the Wap super-enhancer controls Ramp3 expression despite the presence of three parting CTCF sites. Individual and combinatorial deletions of these CTCF sites revealed cell-specific functions of the conserved anchor site. Although unable to block super-enhancer activity, it muffled its impact on Ramp3 in mammary tissue. Unexpectedly, this CTCF site was obligatory for Ramp3 expression in cerebellum, suggesting the coinciding presence of regulatory elements. While our results suggest a surprisingly limited in vivo role for a CTCF anchor in blocking a mammary-specific super-enhancer, they also implicate this site in cerebellum-specific gene activation. Our study illustrates additional complexities of CTCF sites supporting tissue-specific functions.

DESIGN
ChIP-seq for CTCF in wild type and mutant mice ΔAB, ΔC, ΔD were done in mammary tissue. ChIP-seq for CTCF in mutant ΔCDE was done in liver tissue. ChIP-seq for H3K27ac in mutant mice ΔC, ΔD, ΔE were done in mammary tissue. All tissues were from lactation day one (L1).

