TITLE
Chromatin regulation by the NuA4 acetyltransferase complex is mediated by essential interactions between Enhancer of Polycomb (Epl1) and Esa1

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
Enzymes that modify and remodel chromatin are subunits in broadly conserved macromolecular complexes. One key chromatin modification is the dynamic acetylation of histones by opposing activities of acetyltransferase and deacetylase complexes. Among the acetyltransferases, the NuA4 complex containing Tip60 or its Saccharomyces cerevisiae ortholog, Esa1, is of particular significance because of its roles in crucial genomic processes including DNA damage repair and transcription. The catalytic subunit Esa1 is essential, as are five non-catalytic NuA4 subunits. We found that of these non-catalytic subunits, only deletion of Enhancer of polycomb (Epl1) can be bypassed by loss of a major deacetylase complex. This is a property shared by Esa1. Non-catalytic complex subunits are often critical for complex assembly, stability, genomic targeting, substrate specificity and regulation. Understanding the essential cellular role of Epl1 has been limited, a limitation now overcome by the discovery of its bypass suppression. Here, we present the first comprehensive in vivo study of Epl1 upon complete cellular loss of Epl1 using the powerful tool of suppression combined with transcriptional and mutational analyses. Our results highlight functional parallels between Epl1 and Esa1 and further illustrate that the structural role of Epl1 is important for promotion of Esa1 activity. This conclusion is strengthened by our dissection of Epl1 domains required in vivo for interaction with specific NuA4 subunits, histone acetylation, and chromatin targeting. These results provide new insights for the conserved, essential nature of Epl1 and its homologs among organisms, such as EPC1/2 in humans, which is frequently altered in cancers.

DESIGN
Ribodepleted RNA profiles of WT and piccolo-NuA4 bypass strains were generated by RNA-seq, in triplicate, using Illumina Hi-Seq2500

