TITLE
Genomic profile of dextran sulphate sodium-induced colitis model in rats

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Background & Aims: Dextran sulphate sodium (DSS) induced colitis in rats is one of the most widely used models of inflammatory bowel disease. Animal models can provide new insights into the pathogenesis of intestinal inflammation, which is still unknown. We have performed a genomic analysis of the DSS rat colitis including an acute and a recovery phase. Methods: Expression profile of 6 control rats were compared with colitic rats at day 1 every other day until day 23 after DSS treatment using the GeneChip Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array (Affymetrix). Functional and pathways analysis were made with the differentially expressed genes. Keywords: Time course and differentially expressed genes analysis

DESIGN
Experimental design: DSS was administered to animals in drinking water as follows:5%DSS from day 1 to 7, 3%DSS from day 8 to 15, 0% DSS from day 16 to 23. Samples were recovered at days 1, 3, 5, 7 (5%DSS), 9, 11, 13, 15 (2%DSS), 17, 19, 21 and 23 (0%DSS). According to inflammatory markers (Myeloperoxidase activity activity, body weight loss, colonic weigth/length ratio), three replicates at each time point were selected for genomic analysis and 6 control healthy rats (42 arrays). RNA was extracted from homogenized full-thickness colonic tissues in Trizol® reagent (Invitrogen) and purified with RNeasy affinity columns (Qiagen), according to manufacturer´s protocol. The microarray analysis was performed by Progenika Biopharma (Bilbao, Spain) on GeneChip® Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array (Affymetrix). All sample labeling (biotin), hybridization, staining and scanning procedures were carried out using Affimetrix, standard protocols (www.affymetrix.com). Normalization was carried out using Bioconductor sofware (affyPLM package).

PLATFORM
GPL1355 [Rat230_2] Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

