TITLE
Generation and functional characterization of MDSC-like cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) are critical in regulating immune responses by suppressing antigen presenting cells (APC) and T cells. We previously observed that incubation of peripheral blood monocytes with IL-10 during their differentiation to dendritic cells (moDC) results in the generation of an APC population with a CD14+HLA-DRlow phenotype (IL-10-APC) with reduced stimulatory capacity similar to human MDSC. Here, we show that co-incubation of IL-10-APC and moDC caused a reduction of DC-induced T cell proliferation, of the expression of maturation markers and of secreted cytokines and chemokines. Furthermore, addition of IL-10-APC increased the immunosuppressive molecule osteoactivin and its corresponding receptor syndecan-4 on moDC. Using transcriptome analysis, we could identify a set of molecules and pathways  mediating the immunosuppressive effects of IL-10-APCs. In addition, we found that IL-10-APC as well as human isolated MDSC, expressed higher levels of programmed death (PD)-1, PD-ligand-1, glucocorticoid-induced-tumor-necrosis-factor-receptor-related-protein (GITR) and GITR-ligand. Inhibition of osteoactivin, syndecan-4, PD-1 or PD-L1 on MDSC using blocking antibodies restored the stimulatory capacity of DC in co-incubation experiments. Our results demonstrate that osteoactivin/syndecan-4 and PD-/PD-L1 are key molecules that are profoundly involved in the inhibitory effects of MDSC on DC function and might be promising tools for an application in the clinics.

DESIGN
Isolated human monocytes from peripheral blood were differentiated to monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDC) in presence or absence of interleukin-10 (IL-10). Additional cell maturation by application of LPS leads to a total number of 4 conditions with 3 samples each.

PLATFORM
GPL18460 Illumina HiSeq 1500 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
Annkristin Heine, Stefanie Andrea Erika Held, Jonas Schulte-Schrepping, Julia Friederike Andrea Wolff, Kathrin Klee, Thomas Ulas, Niklas Arndt Schmacke, Solveig Nora Daecke, Kati Riethausen, Joachim L. Schultze and Peter Brossart. Generation and functional characterization of MDSC-like cells. OncoImmunology 2017. doi: 10.1080/2162402X.2017.1295203

