TITLE
Analysis of copy number variants on chromosome 21 in Down syndrome-associated congenital heart defects

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
One in five people with Down syndrome (DS) are born with an atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD), an incidence 2,000 times higher than in the euploid population. The genetic loci that contribute to this risk are poorly understood. In this study, we tested two hypotheses: 1) individuals with DS carrying chromosome 21 copy number variants (CNVs) that interrupt exons may be protected from AVSD, because these CNVs return AVSD susceptibility loci back to disomy, and 2) individuals with DS carrying chromosome 21 genes spanned by microduplications are at greater risk for AVSD because these microduplications boost the dosage of AVSD susceptibility loci beyond a tolerable threshold. We tested 236 case individuals with DS+AVSD and 290 control individuals with DS and a normal heart using a custom microarray with dense probes tiled on chromosome 21 for array CGH. We found that neither an individual chromosome 21 CNV nor any individual gene intersected by a CNV was associated with AVSD in DS. Burden analyses revealed that African American controls had more bases covered by rare deletions than did African American cases. Inversely, we found that Caucasian cases had more genes intersected by rare duplications than did Caucasian controls. Pathway analyses indicated copy number perturbtations of genes involved in protein heterotrimerization and histone methylating proteins. Finally, we showed that previously DS+AVSD-associated common CNVs on chromosome 21 are likely false positives. This research adds to the swell of evidence indicating that DS-associated AVSD is similarly heterogeneous, as is AVSD in the euploid population.

DESIGN
aCGH for CNV detection. A single reference individual with Down Syndrome was used for all samples, labeled with Cy3 (Channel 2).

PLATFORM
GPL22821 Agilent-033839 Chr21_60k_final [Probe name version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

