TITLE
Oxygen tension regulates the miRNA profile and bioactivity of exosomes released from extravillous trophoblast cells – implications for complications of pregnancy

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Cell-to-cell communication is essential for the spiral artery (SpA) remodeling and required for maternal transfer of nutrient and oxygen to the fetus. Extravillous trophoblast invade the uterine arteries to remodel the SpA during the first 20 weeks of gestation. Interestingly, oxygen tenstion in the uterine environment changes with the progression of pregnancies and damage in the SpA remodelling can lead to preeclampsia and pther pregnancy complications. Recently, our understanding of how cells communicate has undergone a paradigm shift since the recognition of the role of exosomes on intercellular signaling. Here, we investigated whether oxygen tension alters the exosome release and miRNA profile from extravillous trophoblast (EVT), modifying their bioactivity on endothelial cells. Furthermore, we have established the exosomal miRNA profile at early gestation in women who develop pre-eclampsia (PE) and spontaneous preterm birth (SPTB). The effect of  oxygen tension (i.e. 8% and 1% oxygen) on exosome release was quantified using nanocrystals (Qdot®) coupled to CD63 by fluorescence NTA. A real-time, live-cell imaging system (Incucyte™) was used to establish the effect of exosomes on endothelial cells. Plasma samples were obtained at early gestation ( < 18 weeks) and classified according to pregnancy outcomes. An Illumina TrueSeq Small RNA kit was used to construct a small RNA library from exosomal RNA obtained from EVT and plasma samples. The number of exosomes was significantly hifger in EVT culturedunder 1% compared to 8% oxygen. In total, 741 miRNA were identified in exosomes from EVT. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that these miRNA were associated with cell migration and cytokine production. Interestingly, exosomes isolated from EVT cultured at 8% oxygen increased EC migration, while exosomes from 1% oxygen decrease EC migration. These changes were inversely proportional to TNF-α released from EC. Finally, we have identified a set of uniques miRNA in exosomes from EVT cultured at 1% oxygen and exosomes isolated from maternal at early gestation, who developed PE and SPTB later in pregnancy. We suggest that aberrant exosomal signalling by placental cells is a common aetiological factor in pregnancy complications characterised by incomplete SpA remodeling and is therefore a clinically useful biomarker of pregnancy complications.

DESIGN
miRNAs were profiled from exosomes using next generation seqeuencing, utilising the Illumina NextSeq 500 platform

