TITLE
Circulating long noncoding RNAs INHBA-AS1, MIR4435-2HG, CEBPA-AS1, and AK001058 in plasma serve as diagnostic markers for gastric cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: suitable diagnostic markers for cancers are urgently required in clinical practice. Long noncoding RNAs, which have been reported in many cancer types, are a potential new class of biomarkers for tumor diagnosis. Method: LncRNA gene expression profiles were analyzed in two pairs of human gastric cancer  and adjacent non-tumor tissues by microarray analysis. Nine gastric cancer-associated lncRNAs were selected and assessed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction in gastric tissues, and 5 of them were further analyzed in gastric cancer patients’plasma. Results: Five lncRNAs, including AK001058, INHBA-AS1, MIR4435-2HG, UCA1 and CEBPA-AS1 were validated to be increased in gastric cancer tissues. Furthermore, we found that plasma level of these five lncRNAs were significantly higher in gastric cancer patients compared with normal controls. By receiver operating characteristic analysis, we found that the combination of plasma lncRNAs with the area under the curve up to 0.921, including AK001058, INHBA-AS1, MIR4435-2HG, and CEBPA-AS1, is a better indicator of gastric cancer than their individual levels or other lncRNA combinations. Simultaneously, we found that the expression levels of a series of MIR4435-2HG fragments are different in gastric cancer plasma samples, but most of them higher than that in healthy control plasma samples. Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that certain lncRNAs, such as AK001058, INHBA-AS1, MIR4435-2HG, and CEBPA-AS1, are enriched in human gastric cancer tissues and significantly elevated in the plasma of patients with gastric cancer. These findings indicate that the combination of these four lncRNAs might be used as diagnostic or prognostic markers for gastric cancer patients.

DESIGN
In the study, to explore the potential value of lncRNAs as prognostic biomarkers for gastric cancer (GC) , we conducted lncRNA and mRNA profiling in 2 pairs of human GC and adjacent normal tissue(NT) by microarry.

PLATFORM
GPL15314 Arraystar Human LncRNA microarray V2.0 (Agilent_033010 Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

