TITLE
Round up hi-load herbicide treatment for 2 h

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
The number and type of synthetic chemicals that are being produced worldwide continues to increase significantly. While these industrial chemicals provide numerous benefits, there is no doubt that some have potential to damage the environment and health. Toxicity must be evaluated and use must be carefully controlled and monitored in order to minimize potential damage. DNA microarray technology has become an important new technique in toxicology. We are using the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model organism for toxicological study because it is a simple, fast-growing eukaryote that has been thoroughly characterized. In order to evaluate toxicity by newly synthesized or mixture chemicals, toxicity-induced gene expression alteration profiles by known chemicals should be collected. In our study, cells need to be exposed with same experimental cellular condition, semi lethal (IC50), respectively. In the case of round up (CAS; 40465-66-5), the exposure dose was decided as 1500 times dilution by growth curve with continuously diluted exposure. Roundup is the brand name of a systemic, broad-spectrum herbicide contains the active ingredient glyphosate. Glyphosate is classed as a moderately toxic herbicide and in EPA toxicity class III. // Genomic profile of roundup treatment of yeast using DNA microarray analysis: The herbicide Roundup, which contains glyphosate as the active ingredient, was first introduced in 1974 and has enjoyed widespread use in Japan and elsewhere in the world. Roundup-induced reactions occurring in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae may have a predictive value for understanding responses in higher eukaryotes, and we applied yeast DNA microarray analysis for this purpose. Functional characterization of up-regulated open reading frames (ORFs) following Roundup treatment suggests that Roundup affects membrane structures and cellular organelles. Expression profiles induced by treatments with detergents, oils and hydrostatic pressure were similar to those following Roundup treatment based on cluster analysis. Glyphosate alone was not found to inhibit yeast growth at the concentration contained in the Roundup treatment used for microarray analysis. The toxicity of Roundup appeared to be due to detergent in the product. Keywords: stress response

DESIGN
Series contains triplicate hybridization results from independent biological samples respectively.

PLATFORM
GPL5994 Hitachisoft Hypergene Yeast Chip Ver. 0 (lot 29,30,31) GPL6003 Hitachisoft Hypergene Yeast Chip Ver. 0 (lot 70) GPL6004 Hitachisoft Hypergene Yeast Chip Ver. 0 (lot 71,72)

CITATIONS
15750577

