TITLE
Sodium dodecyl sulfate treatment with 0.01% for 2 h

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
The number and type of synthetic chemicals that are being produced worldwide continues to increase significantly. While these industrial chemicals provide numerous benefits, there is no doubt that some have potential to damage the environment and health. Toxicity must be evaluated and use must be carefully controlled and monitored in order to minimize potential damage. DNA microarray technology has become an important new technique in toxicology. We are using the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model organism for toxicological study because it is a simple, fast-growing eukaryote that has been thoroughly characterized. In order to evaluate toxicity by newly synthesized or mixture chemicals, toxicity-induced gene expression alteration profiles by known chemicals should be collected. In our study, cells need to be exposed with same experimental cellular condition, semi lethal (IC50), respectively. In the case of SDS (CAS; 151-21-3), the exposure dose was decided as 0.01% by growth curve with continuously diluted exposure. SDS is an anionic surfactant that is suspected to be gastrointestinal or liver toxicant. // Toxicity of anionic detergents determined by Saccharomyces cerevisiae microarray analysis: Sodium n-dodecyl benzene sulfonate (LAS) and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) are popular anionic detergents (surfactants) that are used worldwide and the toxicities of these chemicals have been characterized. We applied these chemicals in a DNA microarray bioassay and determined that the microarray data reflects previous findings and also provides some new information about anionic detergent toxicity. The mRNA expression profiles suggest that LAS and SDS cause damage to membranes and alterations in carbon metabolism, and induce the oxidative stress response. We also found that LAS and SDS induce the pleiotropic drug-resistance network, and that LAS and SDS may be pumped out of yeast cells by this network. Hierarchical clustering of the expression profiles showed that LAS and SDS cause similar features of toxicity and that the toxicity is similar to that of capsaicin but different from that of cadmium and mercury. Keywords: stress response

DESIGN
Series contains triplicate hybridization results from independent biological samples respectively.

PLATFORM
GPL5996 Hitachisoft Hypergene Yeast Chip Ver. 0 (lot 41,42,43,44) GPL5997 Hitachisoft Hypergene Yeast Chip Ver. 0 (lot 46)

CITATIONS
14630103

