TITLE
Estrogen receptors alpha and beta mediation of gene expression in mouse vascular tissue

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Estrogen plays an important role in the regulation of vascular tone and in the pathophysiology of cardiovascular disease. Physiological effects of estrogen are mediated through estrogen receptors alpha (ERalpha) and beta (ERbeta), which are both expressed in vascular smooth muscle and endothelial cells. However, the molecular pathways mediating estrogen effects in blood vessels are not well defined. We have performed gene expression profiling in the mouse aorta to identify comprehensive gene sets the expression of which is regulated by long-term (1 wk) estrogen treatment. The ER subtype dependence of the alterations in gene expression was characterized by parallel gene expression profiling experiments in ERalpha-deficient [ERalpha knockout (ERalphaKO)] and ERbeta-deficient (ERbetaKO) mice. Importantly, these data revealed that ERalpha- and ERbeta-dependent pathways regulate distinct and largely nonoverlapping sets of genes. Whereas ERalpha is essential for most of the estrogen-mediated increase in gene expression in wild-type aortas, ERbeta mediates the large majority of estrogen-mediated decreases in gene expression.  Biological functions of the estrogen-regulated genes include extracellular matrix synthesis, in addition to electron transport in the mitochondrion and reactive oxygen species pathways. Of note, the estrogen/ERbeta pathway mediates down-regulation of mRNAs for nuclear-encoded subunits in each of the major complexes of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Several estrogen-regulated genes also encode transcription factors. Overall, these findings provide a foundation for understanding the molecular basis for estrogen effects on vasculature gene expression. Keywords: estrogen, estrogen receptor knockout, gene expression, mouse aorta

DESIGN
Six estrogen receptor alpha knockout (ERaKO) and six estrogen receptor beta knockout (ERbKO) mice and ten of their wild-type littermates (all female, 2.5-4.5 months of age) were ovarioectomized.  Half the mice from each genotype were implanted with 17beta-estradiol pellets, the other half with placebo pellets.   After 7-8 days of estrogen/placebo treatment, aortas were harvested, total RNAs were purified for Affymetrix GeneChip microarray analysis, without pooling. This experiment consists of 6 groups with 3 (ERaKO and ERbKO) or 5 (WT) biological replicates per group, for a total of 22 samples.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
17374850

