TITLE
MMP28 is a key contributor to emphysema pathogenesis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, which is comprised of chronic bronchitis and emphysema, is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality. Because tissue destruction is the prominent characteristic of emphysema, extracellular proteinases, particularly those with elastolytic ability, are often considered to be key drivers in this disease. Several human and mouse studies have implicated roles for matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), particularly macrophage-derived proteinases, in COPD pathogenesis. MMP28 is expressed by the pulmonary epithelium and macrophage, and we have found that it regulates macrophage recruitment and polarization. We hypothesized that MMP28 would have contributory roles in emphysema via alteration of macrophage numbers and activation. Because of the established association of emphysema pathogenesis to macrophage influx, we evaluated the inflammatory changes and lung histology of Mmp28-/- mice exposed to 3 and 6 months of cigarette smoke. At earlier time-points, we found altered macrophage polarization in the smoke-exposed Mmp28-/- lung consistent with other published findings that MMP28 regulates macrophage activation. At both 3 and 6 months, Mmp28-/- mice had blunted inflammatory responses more closely resembling non-smoked mice, with a reduction in neutrophil recruitment and CXCL1 chemokine expression. By 6 months, Mmp28-/- mice were protected from emphysema. These results highlight a previously unrecognized role for MMP28 in promoting chronic lung inflammation and tissue remodeling induced by cigarette smoke and highlight another potential target to modulate COPD.

DESIGN
Total RNA from whole lungs homogenates of wildtype and knockout (Mmp28-/-) mice exposed to room air or 3 months of cigarette smoke was isolated and hybidized to Illumina Mouse Ref-8 v2 Expression BeadChips.

PLATFORM
GPL6885 Illumina MouseRef-8 v2.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
28399390

