TITLE
Estrogen and progesterone receptor dynamics in patient-derived luminal breast cancer xenografts

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Progesterone receptors (PR) are co-expressed in over half of estrogen receptor (ER) positive breast cancers and predict positive response to endocrine therapy. PR can directly and globally modify ER action to attenuate tumor growth. However, whether this suppression occurs solely through PR-ER interactions remains unknown. We assessed tumor growth in two highly ER and PR positive breast cancer patient-derived xenografts (PDX) and found that natural and synthetic progestins potently antagonize the mitogenic effects of estrogens. Here we probed the genome-wide mechanisms by which this occurs. Chronic progestin treatment reversed expression of up to half of estrogen up- and downregulated genes at the transcript level. However, fewer than a quarter of ER DNA binding events were altered by progesterone. The PR cistrome showed an interesting bimodal distribution. In the first group, more than half of PR binding sites were co-occupied by ER, with a propensity for both receptors to coordinately gain or lose binding in the presence of progesterone. In the second group, PR, but not ER, was associated with a large fraction of RNA polymerase III (Pol III)-transcribed tRNA genes regardless of hormone treatment. Furthermore, PR formed a physical association with the Pol III holoenzyme. Select tRNAs with colocalization of PR and POLR3A at their promoters were reduced in tumors grown with estrogen plus progestin compared to estrogen alone. These data uncover a mechanism in solid tumors by which PR modulates the bioavailability of translational molecules that are necessary for robust tumor growth, which could indirectly impede ER action.

DESIGN
Patient-derived luminal breast cancer xenografts from animals treated with placebo, estradiol (E2), E2+medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) ,E2+progesterone (P4), each in triplicate

PLATFORM
GPL11532 [HuGene-1_1-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.1 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

