TITLE
The RNA helicase Ded1p suppresses translation initiation from near-cognate start codons

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
The conserved and essential DEAD-box RNA helicase Ded1p from yeast and its mammalian ortholog DDX3 are critical for translation initiation. Mutations in DDX3 are linked to tumorigenesis and intellectual disability, and the enzyme is targeted by diverse viruses. How Ded1p and its orthologs engage RNAs to impact translation initiation has been a longstanding, unresolved question. Here we show that Ded1p associates with the pre-initiation complex at the mRNA entry channel of the small ribosomal subunit and that the helicase unwinds mRNA structure ahead of the scanning pre-initiation complex. Defective Ded1p causes pervasive translation in 5’UTRs, starting from near-cognate initiation codons located 5' of mRNA structures and concomitant decrease of protein synthesis from of the main ORFs. The data indicate that Ded1p functions to suppress translation initiation on near-cognate codons proximal to mRNA structure and show how the helicase is targeted to specific RNA sites without common sequence signatures. Our results reveal a straightforward mechanism for the activation of upstream open reading frames and suggest that mRNA structure and proximal near-cognate initiation codons encode a widespread regulatory program for translation initiation that is sensitive to RNA helicase function.

DESIGN
We investigated the molecular mechanism of function of the DEAD-box RNA helicase Ded1p during translation initation.The study includes 38 samples, comprised of high-throughput sequencing approaches determining the binding of Ded1p to mRNAs, changes in RNA secondary structure and ribosome binding in response to a sudden loss of Ded1p. These data is derived from biological replicates of an RNA binding deficient, termperature-sensitive Ded1p mutant (ded1-95), and the corresponding wild-type strain.

PLATFORM
GPL17342 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) GPL21656 Illumina HiSeq 4000 (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

