TITLE
Suppression of B-cell development genes is key to glucocorticoid efficacy in treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Glucocorticoids (GCs) are a central component of combination chemotherapy for childhood B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL). GCs work by activating the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), a ligand induced transcription factor, which in turn regulates genes that induce leukemic cell death.  Which GR-regulated genes are required for GC cytotoxicity, the pathways that affect their regulation, and how resistance arises are not well understood. Here we systematically integrate the transcriptional response of B-ALL to GCs with a next-generation shRNA screen to identify GC-regulated “effector” genes that contribute to cell death as well as genes that affect the sensitivity of B-ALL cells to dex. This analysis reveals a pervasive role for GCs in suppression of B-cell development genes that is linked to therapeutic response. Inhibition of PI3Kδ, a lynchpin in the pre-B-cell receptor and IL7R signaling pathways critical to B-cell development, with CAL-101 (idelalisib), interrupts a double-negative feedback loop, enhancing GC-regulated transcription to synergistically kill even highly resistant B-ALL with diverse genetic backgrounds. This work not only identifies numerous opportunities for enhanced lymphoid-specific combination chemotherapy that have the potential to overcome treatment resistance, but is also a valuable resource for understanding GC biology and the mechanistic details of GR-regulated transcription. Please note that the cell lines and primary samples were processed and normalized separately.

DESIGN
The data submitted include the gene expression profiles for 11 cell lines and three primary patient samples.  The cells were all treated in the same way: grown in RPMI plus 10% FBS @ 37˚C with 5% CO2; treated for 4 hours with either 1µM dexamethasone, or 0.1% ethanol as a control; RNA was harvested then run on Illumina HT12 v 4 arrays.  There are at least three reapeats for each treatment and control. Control repeats have the suffix U* whereas the treated have either I* or D* as a suffix.

