TITLE
Multigenerational effect of antibiotic tetracycline on transcriptional responses of D. magna and its relationship to higher levels of biological organizations

ORGANISM
Daphnia magna

SUMMARY
Given the risk of environmental pollution by pharmaceutical compounds and the effects of these compounds on exposed ecosystems, ecologically relevant and realistic assessments are required. However, many studies have been mostly focused on individual responses in a single generation exposed to one-effect concentration. Here, transcriptional responses of the crustacean Daphnia magna to the antibiotic tetracycline across multiple generations and effect concentrations were investigated. The results demonstrated that tetracycline induced different transcriptional responses of daphnids that were dependent on dose and generation. For example, reproduction-related expressed sequence tags (ESTs), including vitellogenin, were distinctly related to the dose-dependent tetracycline exposure, whereas multigenerational exposure induced significant change of molting-related ESTs such as cuticle protein. Sixty-five ESTs were shared in all contrasts, suggesting a conserved mechanism of tetracycline toxicity regardless of exposure concentration or time. Most of them were associated with general stress responses including translation, protein and carbohydrate metabolism, and oxidative phosphorylation. In addition, effects across the dose-response curve showed higher correlative connections among transcriptional, physiological, and individual responses than multigenerational effects. In the multigenerational exposure, the connectivity between adjacent generations decreased with increasing generation number. The results clearly highlight that exposure concentration and time trigger different mechanisms and functions, providing further evidence that multigenerational and dose-response effects cannot be neglected in environmental risk assessment.

DESIGN
The experimental design consisted of four tetracycline concentration (control, 0.1, 1.0, and 10.0 mg L-1) and for four exposure generations (F1, F2, F3, and F4). Only the control treatment and the treatment of 1.0 mg per liter were xposed for four generations. All exposures were run in duplicate

PLATFORM
GPL23022 Agilent-041084 Daphnia Magna

CITATIONS
29023098

