TITLE
Subinhibitory concentrations of ciprofloxacin enhance antimicrobial resistance and pathogenicity of Enterococcus faecium

ORGANISM
Enterococcus faecium Aus0004

SUMMARY
Enterococcus faecium has emerged as a major opportunistic pathogen for two decades, with the spread of hospital-adapted multidrug-resistant clones. Members of the intestinal microbiota, they are subjected to numerous bacterial stresses, including antibiotics at subinhibitory concentrations (SICs). Since fluoroquinolones are extensively prescribed, SICs are very likely to occur in vivo with potential effects on bacterial metabolism with subsequent modulation of opportunistic traits. The aim of the study was to evaluate globally the impact of subinhibitory concentrations (SICs) of ciprofloxacin on antimicrobial resistance and pathogenicity of E. faecium. Transcriptomic analysis was performed by RNA-seq (HiSeq 2500, Illumina) using the vanB-positive reference strain E. faecium Aus0004 in the absence or presence of ciprofloxacin SIC (0.38 mg/L, i.e. MIC 1/8). Several genetic and phenotypic tests were used for validation. In the presence of ciprofloxacin SIC, 196 genes were significantly induced whereas 286 were significantly repressed, meaning that 16.8% of the E. faecium genome was altered. Amongst upregulated genes, EFAU004_02294 (fold change of 14.3) encoded a protein (EfmQnr) homologue of Qnr proteins involved in quinolone resistance in Gram-negative bacilli. Its implication in intrinsic and adaptive FQ resistance in E. faecium was experimentally ascertained. Moreover, EFAU004_02292 coding for the collagen adhesin Acm was also induced by SIC of ciprofloxacin (fold change of 8.2), and higher adhesion capabilities were demonstrated phenotypically. Both Efmqnr and Acm determinants may play an important role in the transition from a commensal to a pathogenic state of E. faecium that resides in the gut of patients receiving a fluoroquinolone therapy.

DESIGN
Transcriptome analysis by RNA-seq to monitor the levels of all transcripts in bacterial cells grown in the absence or the presence of a subinhibitory concentration (0.38 mg/L) of ciprofloxacin

PLATFORM
GPL23028 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Enterococcus faecium Aus0004)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
