TITLE
Murine Pulmonary Responses to Ambient Baltimore Particulate Matter

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Murine Pulmonary Responses to Ambient Baltimore Particulate Matter: Genomic Analysis and Contribution to Airway Hyperresponsiveness Asthma is a complex disease characterized by airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) and chronic airway inflammation. Environmental factors such as ambient particulate matter (PM), a major air pollutant, has been demonstrated in epidemiological studies to contribute to asthma exacerbation and increased asthma prevalence. OBJECTIVE: We investigated the genomic and pathophysiological effects of Baltimore PM (median diameter 1.78 µm) in a murine model of asthma to identify potential biomarkers. METHODS: A/J mice with ovalbumin (OVA) –induced AHR were exposed to PM (20 mg/kg, intratracheal), and both AHR and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) were assayed on days 1, 4, and 7 post exposure. Lung gene expression profiling (Affymetrix Mouse430_ 2.0) by PM (20 mg/kg, intratracheal) were assayed on OVA- and / or PM--challenged mice. RESULTS: Significant increases of airway responsiveness in OVA-treated mice were observed, indicating an asthmatic phenotype. Ambient PM exposure induced significant changes in AHR in both naive mice and OVA-induced asthmatic mice. In both naive and OVA challenged asthmatic mice, PM induced eosinophil and neutrophil infiltration into airways, elevated BAL protein content, and stimulated secretion of TH1 cytokines (IFN-g, IL-6, and TNF-a) and TH2 cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, and eotaxin) into BAL. Consistent with these results, PM induced expression of genes of innate immune response, chemotaxis and complementary system. CONCLUSION: These studies, consistent with epidemiological data, indicate that PM increases AHR and lung inflammation in naïve mice and exacerbates the asthma phenotype of increased AHR and gene expression pattern changes correlated with acute lung inflammation and airway damage. We used microarrays to detail the global programme of gene expression induced by rhPBEF treatment and VALI. Keywords: gene expression

DESIGN
animals were treated by PBS, Oval albumin, PM, or both OVA/PM

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
19057703

