TITLE
Gene expression of splenocytes 6 hours after bortezomib or cyclophosphamide injection

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background: Bortezomib (Bz) is a proteasome inhibitor that directly targets antibody-producing plasma cells. We recently reported the first randomized control trial that evaluated the effects of Bz in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In that study, we demonstrated that Bz treatment is associated with many adverse reactions in patients with refractory disease. In the present study, we examine the therapeutic and toxic effects of Bz on MRL/MpJ-lpr/lpr (MRL/lpr) mice with severe disease activity. Methods: Female MRL/lpr mice at 10 and 14 weeks of age were treated with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (n = 13), Bz (750 μg/kg twice weekly) (n = 12), and cyclophosphamide (Cyc) (1 mg/body, once in 2 weeks) (n = 15). Cellular subsets, serum immunoglobulin, anti-double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (anti-dsDNA) antibody titer, and a pathological index of glomerulonephritis were then analyzed at 22 weeks of age. Survival curves of the 10 and 14 weeks-Bz-treated groups were compared. Blood counts, creatinine, liver enzymes, and serum cytokine levels were measured 1 week after Bz treatment. Gene expression profiling of spleens from Bz and Cyc treatment mice were compared with those from control mice. Results: The anti-dsDNA antibody levels were significantly higher in 14- than in 10-week-old mice, indicating a higher disease activity at 14 weeks. A significant decrease in the number of splenic cells and glomerulonephritis index was observed in Bz- and Cyc-treated mice. Bz, but not Cyc, significantly decreased serum immunoglobulin and anti-dsDNA antibody titer levels. Survival curve analysis revealed a significantly higher mortality rate in 14- than in 10-week-old Bz-treated and control groups. Following two injections of Bz, serum IL-6 and TNF-α levels were significantly more elevated in 14- than in 10-week-old mice. Potentially immunogenic molecules, such as heat shock proteins and calreticulin, were specifically upregulated in spleens of Bz- but not Cyc-treated mice. Conclusions: In spite of its therapeutic effect, Bz treatment had more toxic effects associated with increased pro-inflammatory cytokine levels in mice with a higher disease activity. Understanding the mechanism of the toxicity and developing preventive strategies against it is important for the safe clinical application of Bz in human SLE.

DESIGN
Fourteen-week-old MRL/lpr mice were injected with bortezomib (750 µg/kg, subcutaneously), cyclophosphamide (1mg/body, intraperitoneally) or PBS. The mice were sacrificed, and the spleens were removed 6 h after injecting the drugs. To clarify the change of gene expression profiling, total RNA from spleen tissues were extracted and analysed with microarray.

PLATFORM
GPL10787 Agilent-028005 SurePrint G3 Mouse GE 8x60K Microarray (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

