TITLE
Regulation of gene expression in Streptococcus gordonii by coaggregation with Actinomyces naeslundii

ORGANISM
Streptococcus gordonii str. Challis

SUMMARY
Oral streptococci, including Streptococcus gordonii, and Actinomyces naeslundii, are consistently found to be the most abundant bacteria in the early stages of dental plaque accumulation. These organisms interact physically (coaggregate) in vitro and in vivo. We hypothesized that coaggregation between S. gordonii and A. naeslundii leads to changes in gene expression in the partner organisms. Furthermore, we predicted that coaggregation-induced changes in phenotype contribute to the success of streptococci and actinomyces in dental plaque. To assess the responses of S. gordonii to coaggregation with A. naeslundii, RNA was extracted from S. gordonii cells 3 h after inducing coaggregation with A. naeslundii or from equivalent S. gordonii monocultures. The two RNA populations were reverse transcribed and compared by competitive hybridization with an S. gordonii genomic microarray. The most striking feature of the response to coaggregation was a profound change in expression of S. gordonii genes involved in arginine biosynthesis and transport. Subsequent experiments demonstrated that coaggregation with A. naeslundii stabilizes arginine biosynthesis in S. gordonii and enables growth under low-arginine conditions, such as those present in human saliva. Keywords: Cell-cell interaction

DESIGN
The S. gordonii microarrays consist of 2195 70-mer oligonucleotides representing 2151 open reading frames, each repeated six times on the array. Chemically defined medium (CDM), was based in Tereleckyj’s FMC with minor modifications (Jakubovics et al., 2008). For coaggregate cultures, concentrated suspensions of S. gordonii DL1 (Challis) and A. naeslundii MG1 in CDM were mixed, vortexed and diluted to 1 x 108 cfu/ml. Monocultures were set up identically, except that A. naeslundii cells were omitted. Cultures were incubated at 37oC for 3 h prior to harvesting and extraction of total RNA. Purified RNA was reverse transcribed and cDNAs were labelled with Cy3 or Cy5 dye. cDNAs from coaggregate cultures and from S. gordonii monocultures were competitively hybridized with the S. gordonii microarray. Three independent sets of cultures were used, and flip dye pairs were included for two of the biological replicates (ie 5 hybridizations in total). In control experiments, cDNA derived from A.naeslundii monocultures did not hybridize with the S. gordonii microarrays. Data represent the ratios of gene expression in coaggregated S. gordonii compared with S. gordonii monocultured cells.

PLATFORM
GPL5736 Streptococcus gordonii Challis whole genome array SG-1

CITATIONS
18359813

