TITLE
B cells expressing the IgA receptor FcRL4 participate in the autoimmune response in patients with rheumatoid arthritis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The clinical efficacy of B cell targeting therapies highlights the pathogenic potential of B cells in inflammatory diseases. Expression of Fc Receptor like 4 (FcRL4) identifies a memory B cell subset, which is enriched in the joints of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and in mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue. The high level of RANKL production by this B cell subset indicates a unique pathogenic role. In addition, recent work has identified a role for FcRL4 as an IgA receptor, suggesting a potential function in mucosal immunity. Here, the contribution of FcRL4+ B cells to the specific autoimmune response in the joint of patients with RA was investigated. Single FcRL4+ and FcRL4- B cells were sorted from synovial fluid and tissue from RA patients and their immunoglobulin genes characterized. Levels of hypermutation in the variable regions in both populations were largely consistent with memory B cells selected by an antigen- and T cell-dependent process. Recombinant antibodies were generated based on Ig variable region sequences and investigated for antigen specificity. A significantly larger proportion of the recombinant antibodies generated from the IgH and IgL variable regions of individual synovial FcRL4+ B cells showed reactivity towards citrullinated autoantigens. Furthermore, both in analyses based on heavy chain sequences and flow cytometric detection, these cells have significantly increased usage of the IgA isotype. Their low level of expression of immunoglobulin and plasma cell differentiation genes does not suggest current antibody secretion. We conclude that these activated B cells are a component of the local autoimmune response, and through their RANKL expression, can contribute to joint destruction. Furthermore, their expression of FcRL4 and their enrichment in the IgA isotype points towards a potential role in the link between mucosal and joint inflammation for these cells.

DESIGN
B cells were sorted from synovial fluid of 4 individuals with rheumatoid arthritis into FcRL4 positive and negative fractions, and RNA-seq was performed.

PLATFORM
GPL16791 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
Khaled Amara, Elizabeth Clay, Lorraine Yeo, Daniel Ramskold, Julia Spengler, Natalie Sippl, James Cameron, Lena Israelsson, Philip J. Titcombe, Caroline Gronwall, Ilfita Sahbudin, Andrew Filer, Karim Raza, Vivianne Malmstrom, Dagmar Scheel-Toellner. Immunoglobulin characteristics and RNAseq data of FcRL4+ B cells sorted from synovial fluid and tissue of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Data in Brief 2017;13:356-370. DOI:10.1016/j.dib.2017.06.009

