TITLE
Deletion of Stk40 impairs definitive erythropoiesis in the mouse fetal liver

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The serine threonine kinase Stk40 has been shown to involve in mouse embryonic stem cell differentiation, pulmonary maturation and adipocyte differentiation. Here we report that targeted deletion of Stk40 leads to fetal liver hypoplasia and anemia in the mouse embryos. The reduction of erythrocytes in the fetal liver is accompanied by increased apoptosis and compromised erythroid maturation. Stk40-/- fetal liver cells have significantly reduced colony forming units (CFUs) capable of erythroid differentiation, including burst forming unit-erythroid (BFU-E), colony forming unit-erythroid (CFU-E), and CFU-granulocyte, erythrocyte, megakaryocyte and macrophage (CFU-GEMM), but not CFU-granulocyte/macrophages (CFU-GM). Purified Stk40-/- megakaryocyte-erythrocyte progenitors (MEPs) produced substantially fewer CFU-E colonies compared to control cells. Moreover, Stk40-/- fetal liver erythroblasts failed to form normal erythroblastic islands in association with wild type or Stk40-/- macrophages, indicating an intrinsic defect of Stk40-/- erythroblasts. Furthermore, the hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell pool is reduced in Stk40-/- fetal livers but still retains the multi-lineage reconstitution capacity. Finally, analysis of microarray data of E14.5 fetal liver cells suggests a potential role of aberrantly activated TNF-α signaling in Stk40 depletion induced dyserythropoiesis with a concomitant increase in cleaved Caspase-3 and decrease in Gata1 proteins. Altogether, the identification of Stk40 as a regulator for fetal erythroid differentiation, maturation and survival provides new clues to the molecular regulation of erythropoiesis and related diseases.

DESIGN
Six E14.5 mouse fetal liver cells of same genotype were pooled together for each sample. There are two replicates for each genetype. mRNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays were performed by Shanghai Biochip Company.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
28358362

MICROARRAYP
T
