TITLE
Microarray analysis of the effect of the xenobiotic beta-aminobutyric acid in Arabidopsis ecotype Co

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Summary: The non-protein amino acid beta-aminobutyric acid (BABA) primes Arabidopsis to respond more quickly and strongly to pathogen and osmotic stress. Here, we report that BABA also significantly enhanced acquired thermotolerance in Arabidopsis. This thermotolerance was dependent on heat shock protein 101, a critical component of the normal heat shock response. BABA did not enhance basal thermotolerance under a severe heat shock treatment. No roles for the hormones ethylene and salicylic acid in BABA-induced acquired thermotolerance were identified by mutant analysis. By global gene expression analysis, transcript levels for several transcription factors and DNA binding proteins regulating responses to the stress hormone abscisic acid (ABA) were found to be elevated in BABA-treated relative to water-treated plants. The role of ABA in BABA-induced thermotolerance was complex. BABA-enhanced thermotolerance was partially compromised in the ABA-insensitive mutant, abi1-1, but was augmented in abi2-1. In an unrelated process, BABA, like ABA, inhibited root growth and the level of inhibition was roughly additive in roots treated with both compounds. Root growth of both abi1-1 and abi2-1 was also inhibited by BABA. Unexpectedly, abi1-1 and abi2-1 root growth was inhibited more strongly by combined ABA and BABA treatments than by BABA alone. Our results together with previously published data suggest that BABA is a general enhancer of plant stress resistance and that cross-talk occurs between BABA and ABA signalling cascades. Specifically, the BABA-mediated accumulation of ABA transcription factors without concomitant activation of a downstream ABA response could represent one component of the BABA-primed state in Arabidopsis. Overall design: A replicate experimental design type is where a series of replicates are performed to evaluate reproducibility or as a pilot study to determine the appropriate number of replicates for a subsequent experiments. Keywords: replicate_design

DESIGN
Arabidopsis Col-0 plants were grown in ProMix HP (Premier Horticulture, Red Hill, PA, USA) for 14 days and the soil was drenched with a 0.25 mM BABA solution 1 day prior to harvesting samples for RNA preparation. These plants were grown in a growth chamber at 21?C with a 14-hr photoperiod. All plants were grown at a light intensity of about 100 ? 150 ?E m-2 s-1. BABA (mixed isomers, Sigma, Milwaukee, WI, USA) was diluted in water at indicated concentration. A biological sample represents a comparison between plants that were water-treated (green channel) to plants drenched with BABA (red channel). This study represents 4 independent biological replicates. Computed

PLATFORM
GPL6086 CIW-8_09-02a

CITATIONS
18047473

