TITLE
The Influence of a Cryptochrome on the Gene Expression Profile in the Diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum under Blue Light and in Darkness

ORGANISM
Phaeodactylum tricornutum

SUMMARY
Diatoms, albeit being only distantly related with higher plants, harbour a plant-like cryptochrome (CryP) that was proposed to act as a photoreceptor required for the regulation of photosynthetic proteins. Importantly, plant cryptochromes are assumed to be involved in the regulation of developmental processes that are only needed in multicellular organisms; their role in the unicellular diatoms to date is mostly enigmatic. To elucidate the function of this plant-like cryptochrome in a unicellular species, we examined the role of CryP in the regulation of transcription in the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum by comparative RNA-seq of wild type and CryP knock-down mutants, under prolonged darkness and one hour after onset of blue light. In total, mRNAs of 12,298 genes were identified and more than 70% of the genes could be sorted into functional bins. We here show that CryP influences gene expression in three different ways: some genes are regulated by CryP under blue light only, others independent of the light condition and surprisingly some are regulated by CryP only in darkness. Changes under blue light included only around 4% of total genes, and genes regulated in any condition were distributed over almost all functional categories. Expression of photosynthesis genes was lowered by CryP under BL, in contrast to the overall enhancement in wild-type cells under the same conditions. Interestingly, CryP also exerted an influence on two other photoreceptors: the genes for phytochrome (Pt-DPH) and CPF1, another cryptochrome of Phaeodactylum tricornutum, were down-regulated by CryP independent of the light condition. However, the regulatory effects of the different photoreceptors on transcriptional output were independent. The influence of CryP on the expression of other photoreceptors hints to the existence of a regulatory signalling network in diatoms that includes several cryptochromes and phytochrome, whereby CryP acts as a regulator of transcript abundance under light as well as in darkness.

DESIGN
Transcriptomes of Phaeodactylum tricornutum wild type (WT) and antisense mutants in the plant-like cryptochrome CryP (Na1, Ta3)  grown for 4 d in a dark/light cycle, then kept for 72h in darkness and then shifted to blue light conditions for 1 h. WT samples and Na1 blue light samples were sequenced in biological triplicates, all other samples in biological duplicates.

PLATFORM
GPL17128 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Phaeodactylum tricornutum)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

