TITLE
Salmonella typhimurium igaA(T191P) and related

ORGANISM
Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium

SUMMARY
We have exploited a spontaneously isolated mutant IgaA(T191P) that is near-maximally activated for the Rcs system, to identify a vast set of genes that respond, and report new regulatory properties of this signaling system in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. Microarray data show that the Rcs system normally functions as a positive regulator of SPI-2 and other genes important for growth of Salmonella in macrophages, although when highly activated, the system completely represses the SPI-1/SPI-2 virulence, flagellar, and fimbrial biogenesis pathways. The auxilliary protein RcsA, which works with RcsB to positively regulate colanic acid and other target genes, not only stimulates but also antagonizes the positive regulation of many genes in the igaA mutant. We show that RcsB represses motility through the 'RcsB box' in the promoter region of the master operon flhDC, and that RcsA is not required for this regulation. Curiously, RcsB selectively stimulates expression of the flagellar Type 3 secretion genes fliPQR; an RcsAB box located downstream of fliR influences this regulation. We show that excess colanic acid impairs swimming and inhibits swarming motility, consistent with the inverse regulation of the two pathways by the Rcs system. The work was published in Journal of Bacteriology: Wang Q, Zhao Y, McClelland M, Harshey RM. The RcsCDB signaling system and swarming motility in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium: dual regulation of flagellar and SPI-2 virulence genes. J Bacteriol. 2007 Sep 28; [Epub ahead of print] PMID: 17905992 [PubMed - as supplied by publisher] Keywords: Comparative genomic hybridization

DESIGN
Microarray was used to reveal the gene expression profiles in igaA(T191P) and related strains at two growth stages (log and stationary phases). Quantitative RT-PCR was used for detail studies.

PLATFORM
GPL1835 STv5B_MMCC GPL3788 STv6_MMCC GPL4804 STv7S_MMCC

CITATIONS
17905992

