TITLE
The salivary transcriptome of Anopheles gambiae (Diptera: Culicidae) larvae: A microarrray-based study

ORGANISM
Anopheles gambiae

SUMMARY
In spite of the many recent developments in the field of vector sialomics, the salivary glands of larvalmosquitoes have been largely unexplored. We used whole-transcriptome microarray analysis to create a gene-expression profile of the salivary gland tissue of fourth-instar Anopheles gambiae larvae, and compare it to the gene-expression profile of a matching group of whole larvae. We identified a total of 221 probes with expression values that were (a) significantly enriched in the salivary glands, and (b)sufficiently annotated as to allow the prediction of the presence/absence of signal peptides in their corresponding gene products. Based on available annotation of the protein sequences associated with these probes, we propose that the main roles of larval salivary secretions include: (a) immune response, (b) mouthpart lubrication, (c) nutrient metabolism, and (d) xenobiotic detoxification. Other highlights of the study include the cloning of a transcript encoding a previously unknown salivary defensin (AgDef5), the confirmation of mucus secretion by the larval salivary glands, and the first report of salivary lipocalins in the Culicidae. Keywords: Anopheles gambiae, salivary gland, Diptera, gene expression, salivary defensin, transcriptome, salivary lipocalin

DESIGN
We attempted to identify transcripts that are both present and significantly enriched in the salivary glands (SG) of the 4th instar Anopheles gambiae larva. Transcripts were considered as present in the SG if the built-in Affymetrix detection call scored them as such in all three biological replicates of the experiment. Expression values (i.e. signal intensities) of transcripts from the salivary glands were compared to those of a matching group of whole 4th instar larvae using a t-test. Transcripts showing an expression value two-fold or higher (p < 0.01; false discovery rate=1%) in the SG as compared to whole larvae were considered to be significantly enriched.

PLATFORM
GPL1321 [Plasmodium_Anopheles] Affymetrix Plasmodium/Anopheles Genome Array

CITATIONS
19328852

