TITLE
Prioritization of Contaminants of Emerging Concern in wastewater treatment plant discharges using transcriptional effects in caged fish

ORGANISM
Pimephales promelas

SUMMARY
We applied an effects-based approach to determine if the impact of specific chemicals in mixtures discharged by waste water treatment plants could be linked to well-defined gene expression changes in exposed fish. Fathead minnows were deployed in cages for 2, 4, or 8 days at three locations near two WWTP discharge sites in the Saint Louis Bay, Duluth, MN and one upstream control site. The impact of 51 chemicals detected in the surface water on gene expression in ovaries of caged fish was determined using exposure activity ratios, existing knowledge on chemical:gene relationships, and analysis of gene expression co-variance with surface water chemistry. Thirty-two chemicals could be linked to gene expression and 12 were confirmed by other sources such as the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD). Chemical:gene associations determined by co-variation were supported by exposure activity ratios sufficient to cause biological effects, known chemical:gene associations from CTD, and upstream regulator analysis of the Ingenuity knowledge base. The analyses provided multiple lines of evidence that bisphenol A and estrone are likely sources of estrogenic effects on gene expression found at the study sites.

DESIGN
Fish were deployed at four sites in the St Louis River near Duluth, MN, USA. One site upstream of the WWTPs (Fond du Lac, FDL; N 46° 39.517, W 92° 16.951) was chosen as ‘reference’ location. Two sites were located near the Western Lake Superior Sanitary District (WLSSD) discharge. One (WLSSD-1; N 46° 45.460, W 92° 7.227) was located 10 m from the discharge, while the second (WLSSD-2; N 46° 45.347, W 92° 7.213) was located further in the main channel, 100 m from the discharge.  A fourth site was located near the Superior Municipal Treatment Plant discharge (SMTP; N 46° 43.758, W 92° 4.125). A detailed description of the caging system can be found in Kahl et al.32. Briefly, three buoys anchored to the bottom sediment at each site. Three cages of fish, each containing 6 male and 6 female adult fathead minnows (5-6 month old) were attached to a buoy and its anchor, suspending cages at a depth of 1-2 m. After 2, 4, or 8 d of exposure, fish from two cages, each from a separate buoy, were transferred into separate buckets containing surface water collected at the appropriate site, and transported to the laboratory (transit time < 60 min) for sampling. Animals were not fed during transit nor in the field. Fish were individually anesthetized and euthanized with MS-222 (Argent, Redmond, WA, USA), weighed, and evaluated for any external lesions. Blood and tissues (liver, gonad) were collected and stored at -80°C until extracted and analyzed. The normalized data were not available at the time of submission and therefore not included in these records.

PLATFORM
GPL9248 Agilent-019597 FHM_Denslow_8x15K [Feature Number version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

