TITLE
The methylome of a cartilaginous fish, Callorhinchus milii, reveals conservation of epigenetic regulation across jawed vertebrates

ORGANISM
Callorhinchus milii

SUMMARY
Background Methylation of CG dinucleotides constitutes a critical system of epigenetic memory in bony vertebrates, where it modulates gene expression and suppresses transposon activity. The genomes of studied vertebrates are pervasively hypermethylated, with the exception of regulatory elements such as transcription start sites (TSSs), where the presence of methylation is associated with gene silencing. This system is not found in the sparsely methylated genomes of invertebrates, and establishing how it arose during early vertebrate evolution is impeded by a paucity of epigenetic data from basal vertebrates. Methods We perform whole-genome bisulfite sequencing to generate the first genome-wide methylation profiles of a cartilaginous fish, the elephant shark Callorhinchus milii. Employing these to determine the elephant shark methylome structure and its relationship with expression, we compare this with higher vertebrates and an invertebrate chordate using published methylation and transcriptome data. Results Like higher vertebrates, the majority of elephant shark CG sites are highly methylated, and methylation is abundant across the genome rather than patterned in the mosaic configuration of invertebrates. This global hypermethylation includes transposable elements and the bodies of genes at all expression levels. Significantly, we document an inverse relationship between TSS methylation and expression in the elephant shark, supporting the presence of the repressive regulatory architecture shared by higher vertebrates. Conclusions Our demonstration that methylation patterns in a cartilaginous fish are characteristic of higher vertebrates imply the conservation of this epigenetic modification system across jawed vertebrates separated by 465 million years of evolution. In addition, these findings position the elephant shark as a valuable model to explore the evolutionary history and function of vertebrate methylation.

DESIGN
Whole-genome bisulfite sequencing was used to generate genome-wide methylation profiles from one male and one female liver sample. Low-coverage sequencing was also performed on additional liver, spleen and pancreas samples.

PLATFORM
GPL23184 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Callorhinchus milii) GPL23272 Illumina MiSeq (Callorhinchus milii)

CITATIONS
28580133

