TITLE
RNA-Sequencing and proteomics approaches reveal multi-cellular deficits in the cortex of Rett syndrome mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Rett syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder caused by mutations in the transcriptional regulator MeCP2. RTT is characterized by having apparently normal development until 6-18 months, when a progressive decline in motor and language functions begins and breathing abnormalities and seizures present. Despite intense research, the molecular targets of MeCP2 and their contribution to the disease are unknown. Here we present the first comprehensive and comparative transcriptomic and proteomic analysis in a RTT mouse model. Examining whole cortex tissue in symptomatic males (Mecp2Jae/y) and wild-type littermates, we have identified 391 genes and 465 proteins considered to be significantly altered. We observed an overall poor correlation between global gene and protein expression (Pearson correlation 0.12), yet 35 hits were common to both data sets, with 12 hits not described elsewhere. These 35 hits indicate disrupted cellular metabolism, calcium signaling, protein stability, DNA binding and cytoskeletal cell structure in the RTT cortex. Pathway analysis in both data sets identified biological pathways ubiquitous to multiple cell types as well as cell type specific pathways, underscoring the contributions of multiple central nervous system (CNS) cell populations to the disease pathogenesis. These findings prompted us to compare identified ‘hits’ to a publicly available database containing CNS cell type specific gene expression. This indicated approximately 32% of differentially expressed (DE) genes and 16% proteins were highly enriched in unique CNS cell types, while the remaining DE genes and proteins were ubiquitously expressed and not ascribable to any unique cell population. Our comparative transcriptome and proteome analysis in the cortex of RTT mice supports previous works indicating widespread CNS dysfunction.

DESIGN
Wild-type (WT) males were bred with heterozygous Mecp2tm1.1Jae/+ (Jaenisch) female mice. The whole cortex of mutant male mice (Mecp2Jae/y) along with WT littermates were collected after postnatal day 60 (P60+). An n of 4 biological replicates per genotype were used, with WT animals serving as controls. For RNA-Sequencing, 2 technical replicates were run per biological replicate.

PLATFORM
GPL17021 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

