TITLE
Differential susceptibility of Wistar Kyoto and spontaneously hypertensive rats to diesel exhaust particle exposure.

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
DEP exposure is linked to increases in cardiovascular effects. This effect is enhanced in individuals with pre-existing disease. Animal models of cardiovascular disease are used to study this susceptibility. The heart is rich in mitochondria, which produce high levels of free radicals, leading to inactivation of tricarboxylic acid cycle enzymes. We hypothesized that a 4-wk DEP inhalation would result in strain-related structural impairment of cardiac mitochondria and changes in these enzyme activities in WKY and SHR. Male rats (12-14 wks age) were exposed whole body to air or 0.5 or 2.0 mg/m3 DEP for 6h/d, 5 d/wk for 4 wks. Neutrophilic influx was noted in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in both strains. A slightly lower level of baseline cardiac mitochondrial aconitase activity was seen in SHR than WKY. Aconitase activity appeared to be decreased in an exposure related manner in both strains. Significantly higher baseline levels of cardiac cytosolic ferritin and aconitase activity were seen in the SHR than WKY. No exposure-related changes were noted in either of these measures. Mitochondrial succinate and isocitrate dehydrogenase activities were not changed following DEP exposure in either strain. Transmission electron microscopy images of the heart indicated abnormalities in cardiac mitochondria of control SHR but not control WKY. No exposure related ultrastructural changes were induced by DEP in either strain. In conclusion, strain differences in cardiac biomarkers of oxidative stress and structure of mitochondria exist between SHR and WKY. DEP exposure results in small changes in cardiac mitochondrial and cytosolic markers of oxidative stress. (Abstract does not represent USEPA policy.) Keywords: strain differences, exposure differences

DESIGN
Two strains of rats (Wistar Kyoto (WKY) and spontaneously hypertensive (SH) rats were exposed to either diesel exhaust particles or clean air.  Four biological replicates were used for each strain/treatment exposure.  Total number of chips equals 16.

PLATFORM
GPL341 [RAE230A] Affymetrix Rat Expression 230A Array

CITATIONS
19165385

