TITLE
De-regulation of maize C4 photosynthetic development in a mesophyll cell defective mutant: Bundle sheath and Mesophyll

ORGANISM
Zea mays

SUMMARY
During Zea mays (maize) C4 differentiation, mesophyll (M) and bundle sheath (BS) cells accumulate distinct sets of photosynthetic enzymes, with very low photosystem II (PSII) content in BS chloroplasts. Consequently, there is little linear electron transport in the BS and ATP is generated by cyclic electron flow. In contrast, M thylakoids are very similar to those of C3 plants and produce the ATP and NADPH that drive metabolic activities. Regulation of this differentiation process is poorly understood but involves expression and coordination of nuclear and plastid genomes. Here, we identify a recessive allele of the maize Hcf136 homologue that in Arabidopsis thaliana functions as a PSII stability or assembly factor located in the thylakoid lumen. Proteome analysis of the thylakoids and electron microscopy reveal that Zm hcf136 lacks PSII complexes and grana thylakoids in M chloroplasts, consistent with the previously defined Arabidopsis function. Interestingly, hcf136 is also defective in processing the full-length psbB-psbT-psbH-petB-petD polycistron specifically in M chloroplasts. To determine whether the loss of PSII in M cells affects C4 differentiation, we performed cell-type specific transcript analysis of hcf136 and wild-type seedlings. The results indicate that M and BS cells respond uniquely to the loss of PSII, with little overlap in gene expression changes between data sets. These results are discussed in the context of signals that may drive differential gene expression in C4 photosynthesis. Keywords: cell type comparison

DESIGN
To explore the disruption of PSII activity on gene expression, transcript profiles from separated M and BS cells were examined using two-label microarray analysis. Total RNA was isolated from the second leaves of mutant and wild-type silbings. Six biological replicates were used to compare wild-type and mutant transcript profiles in separate M and BS experiments. To maximize biological replication, different seedling pools were used for each of the 12 hybridizations. Microarray experiments and analyses were performed using the Genisphere MPX900 kit and the Maize Array Consortium oligonucleotide platform (GPL5439; GPL5440). Feature intensity values were log-transformed and corrected for local background signal, and a LOWESS procedure (Dudoit et al., 2002) was used to normalize between channels. Features with either low or saturating signal intensity were discarded from further analysis. High expression filtering was less stringent to avoid elimination of previously characterized, high abundance, C4 cell-specific transcripts. After filtering, features that were not assigned an MZ number by the Maize Array Consortium were discarded from further analysis. The moderated t-test (Smyth, 2004) using the R package limma was applied to identify differentially expressed genes. The p-values for each test (gene) were converted to q-values for false discovery rate analysis as described by Storey et al. (2004). To avoid confounding treatment effects associated with direct comparisons of M and BS transcriptomes (Sawers et al., 2007),  comparisons were only made using the same cell type across the hcf136 and wild-type sibling genotypes. Bundle sheath (BS) Samples: GSM245063-GSM245164 Mesophyll (M) Samples: GSM245165 - GSM245206

PLATFORM
GPL5439 Maize oligo array version 1.9 array A GPL5440 Maize oligo array version 1.9 array B

CITATIONS
18258693

