TITLE
Myogenesis inhibition and autophagy activation are independent events in CDM1 myoblasts: critical role of miRNAs and type I interferon response

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Congenital Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 (CDM1) affects patients from birth and is characterized by severe symptoms with 40% mortality in the neonatal period, however the molecular mechanisms leading to this complex phenotype are not yet clear. In this paper we studied the relationship between autophagy and abnormal differentiation, and investigated these pathological features at the ultrastructural and molecular level, utilizing two CDM1 fetal myoblasts carryng different numbers of triplets (MCBO and DM15Q with 1800 and 3200 repeats respectively). Our results indicated that increased autophagy was independent from differentiation, as MCBO differentiated as well as control but underwent autophagy like DM15Q which did not differentiate. miRNA expression profiles revealed that DM15Q myoblasts failed to upregulate the complex network of myomiRNAs under MYOD and MEF2A control while this network was upregulated in MCBO. Interestingly, the abnormal differentiation of DM15Q correlated with the upregulation of miR-155-3p and the type 1 interferon pathway. The activation of the interferon pathway might contribute to the severe symptoms observed in CDM1 patients. These findings open up the possibility of new therapeutic approaches to treat CDM1 as well as other types of trinucleotide repeats disorders, where dsRNA is formed.

DESIGN
miRNA profiing of two CDM1 fetal myoblasts carryng different numbers of triplets (MCBO and DM15Q with 1800 and 3200 repeats, respectively).  12,000 cells/cm2 were grown in HAM’S/F10 medium with 50 µg/ml Fetuin, 5 µg/ml Insulin, 0.5 mg/ml BSA and 20% FBS to subconflence.  Subconfluent cells were shifted to differentiation medium (MEM with 10 µg/ml, insulin, 10 ng/ml EGF and 0.5 mg/ml BSA) were samples at day 0 and day 3.  Two replicates per sample.

PLATFORM
GPL15520 Illumina MiSeq (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

