TITLE
Validation of the Personalized Gene Therapy by stably transfection of PANK2 in the papillary (BCPAP) and anaplastic (8505C) thyroid cancer cell lines

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
An ideal cancer gene therapy would selectively destroy the cancer cells without affecting much the healthy tissue. This would be possible if and only if the cancer and normal cells of the tumor are governed by distinct gene master regulators (GMRs). Logic dictates that, while being strongly protected by the homeostatic mechanisms, expression of a GMR governs the phenotype by modulating major functional pathways through controlling the expression of the involved genes.  We determined the GMRs of the standard papillary (BCPAP) and anaplastic (8505C) thyroid cancer cell lines. The hierarchy of the known biomarkers was established based on their gene commanding height (GCH), an original measure combining the expression control and coordination with expression of other genes. We found that the sets of the GMRs are largely different in the two thyroid cancer cell lines, indicatibg that each type of thyroid cancer needs a different gene-targeting therapy. In this experiment, we determined the transcriptomic effects of the stable transfection of PANK2 gene In the papillary (BCPAP) and anaplastic (8505C) thyroid cancer cell lines. PANK2 was selected because it has significantly different GCHs in the two cell lines:  44.64 in BCPAP and 3.61 in 8505C.  The significantly more up- and down-regulated genes in the transfected BCPAP than in the transfected 8505C cells compared to their untransfected counterparts validated the theory and indicated the usefulness of our personalized gene therapy approach.

DESIGN
Two-conditions (AP=BCPAP cells stably transfected with PANK2, BP=8505C cells stably transfected with PANK2), 4 replicas of each condition

PLATFORM
GPL10332 Agilent-026652 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4x44K v2 (Feature Number version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

