TITLE
RNA expression across 6 strains of mice in relation to prepulse inhibition testing, as described in: Pdxdc1 (pyridoxal-dependent decarboxylase domain containing 1) modulates pre-pulse inhibition of acoustic startle in the mouse

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
C3H/HeJ, BalbC/J, C57BL/6J, C57BL10/J, C57BLKS/J, C57L/J strains were tested for variability in gene expression in hippocampus, striatal, and brainstem tissues to affiliate findings with behavioural prepulse inhibition scores Abstract: Current antipsychotic medications used to treat schizophrenia all target the dopamine D2 receptor. Although these drugs have serious side effects and limited efficacy, no novel molecular targets for schizophrenia treatment have been successfully translated into new medications. To identify novel potential treatment targets for schizophrenia, we searched for previously unknown molecular modulators of acoustic pre-pulse inhibition (PPI), a schizophrenia endophenotype, in the mouse. We examined six inbred mouse strains that have a range of PPI, and used microarrays to determine which mRNA levels correlated with PPI across these mouse strains. We examined several brain regions involved in PPI and schizophrenia: hippocampus, striatum and brainstem, and found transcripts that had good correlation with PPI level, and confirmed this with real-time quantitative PCR. We then selected one candidate gene for further study, Pdxdc1 (pyridoxal-dependent decarboxylase domain containing 1), because it is a putative enzyme that could metabolize catecholamine neurotransmitters, and thus might be a feasible target for new medications. We determined that Pdxdc1 mRNA and protein are both strongly expressed in the hippocampus and levels of Pdxdc1 are inversely correlated with PPI across the six mouse strains. Using shRNA packaged in a lentiviral vector, we suppressed Pdxdc1 protein levels in the hippocampus and increased PPI by at least 16%. Our results suggest that Pdxdc1 may regulate PPI and could be investigated further as a potential treatment target for schizophrenia.

DESIGN
18 arrays were sampled per tissue type, 3 arrays per strain of mice, two of which were from control mice (untested for PPI) and one from PPI tested mice, each array had pooled tissue from 3 mice from the experimental group, from alternating hemispheres (e.g. 2 tissue samples from right, 1 from left, and vice versa to balance the whole 3-array set from each strain). 3 tissue types were tested: brainstem, hippocampus, and striatum.

