TITLE
Expression data from flowers of two isogenic lines J10AB and J03AB at different developmental stages

ORGANISM
Brassica napus

SUMMARY
Dominant genic male sterility (DGMS) is a valuable system for hybrid seed production and improvement of plant populations, but the molecular mechanism of DGMS is not well understood. To facilitate the analysis of mechanism underlying DGMS, we compared gene expression profiles between fertile and sterile flowers of two pair of Brassica napus isogenic lines: J10AB and J03AB which only differ in sterility-related locus and fertility restore-related locus respectively by using Arabidopsis thaliana ATH-1 microarray. Gene expression profiling revealed that 360 genes differed in expression between the two lines and the number of differently expressed genes increased with progressing developmental stages. Cluster analysis result indicates that most important gene expression changes occur from PMC (anther less than 1mm) to uninucleate stage (anther in 3mm). There are 182 differential expressed genes detected between fertile plants and sterile plants at same stage.  Some important pathways related to fertility control by KEGG analysis, such as glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway, flavonoid biosynthesis pathway and fatty acid metabolism pathway. Another abortion usually associated with suppression of gene expression of these pathways. Keywords: Time course analysis

DESIGN
The Homozygous DGMS two-type line J10AB was compared with heterozygous two-type line J03AB at three different stages of development: tetrad stage, uninucleate stage and trinucleate stage (Flower buds < 1, 1-3 and > 3mm, respectively) which were confirmed by cytology observation. All these flower buds were collected by hand. For each stage, two biological repetitions and two experimental repetitions were used, resulting in four hybridizations per developmental stage. Gene expression was compared between lines at different stages of development, as well as between developmental stages of fertile plants and sterile plants of each line.

PLATFORM
GPL198 [ATH1-121501] Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

