TITLE
Selectin independent adhesion during metastases of ovarian cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Tumor cell extravasation takes place, similar to leukocytes, in a multi-step process by which cells emigrate from the blood stream through the vascular endothelium into the tissue. Selectins are regarded as the most important molecules for the first capturing step of the cascade. Whether all tumor cells employ selectin dependent adhesion to metastasize or there is an alternative mechanism still is an open question. Comparative transcriptomic analysis of OVCAR8 and SKOV3 cultured cells and revealed that one third of genes encoding proteins involved in the selectin dependent leukocyte like adhesion cascade show lower expression levels in OVCAR8 cultured cells in comparison to that in SKOV3 cultured cells. In contrast to SKOV3 cells, c-Fos overexpression in OVCAR8 cells does not significantly influence expression of the leukocyte like adhesion cascade genes leaving them at similar levels as in control OVCAR8 cells. The intraperitoneal xenograft model of OVCAR8 cells demonstrated that aggressiveness of OVCAR8-derived tumors is not dependent of c-Fos expression level and comparable with that for SKOV3 control tumors. Based on transcriptome array data we analyzed in details expression of genes encoding proteins involved in the leukocyte like adhesion cascade, E- and P-selectin ligands, as well as glycosylation enzymes in both type of tumors. Our results suggest that selectin-dependent mechanism is not the only for adhesion of OVCAR8 ovarian cancer cells. There is at least one additional mechanism of extravasation that does not rely on selectins.

DESIGN
We studied the influence of c-Fos overexpression on transcriptomes and in vivo metastatic potential of human ovarian cancer cell line OVCAR8 in comparison of the similar earlier obtained data for SKOV3 cells. First, we performed a comparative transcriptomic analysis of OVCAR8 and SKOV3 cultured cells. Then, to find out if there is a correlation between the cascade gene expression and metastatic potential of the ovarian cancer cells with and without overexpression of c-Fos we employed the intraperitoneal xenograft model of OVCAR8 cells.

PLATFORM
GPL6244 [HuGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

