TITLE
Effects of vasectomy on gene expression profiling along the human epididymis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Worldwide, almost 100 millions men rely on vasectomy for male contraceptive purposes. Due to changes in their personal life, an increasing number of these men request surgical vasectomy reversal. Unfortunately, a significant proportion of these men remain infertile, despite the reestablishment of patent ducts, possibly due to epididymal damages caused by vasectomy. In animal models, vasectomy affects different epididymal physiological and biochemical parameters. However, consequences of vasectomy on these biochemical parameters are poorly understood at the molecular level. Furthermore, results obtained with animal models cannot by extrapolated to human to understand the consequences of vasectomy on epididymal functions. Gene expression pattern of epididimydis is highly regulated. We previously showed that the human epididymal expression pattern of two genes is altered under vasectomy. To complete the list of epididymal genes affected by vasectomy, we analysed the epididymal gene expression profile of three vasectomised donors, using the affymetrix human GeneChip U133 Plus 2. These results were compared with gene expression pattern of three “normal” donors. The data generated allowed the identification of many human epididymal genes for which the expression is modified under vasectomy. Qt-PCR and western-blot analysis of six selected genes known to be expressed in specific epididymal segments were performed. The Qt-PCR results confirmed the selected transcripts expression pattern deduced from microarrays data, while the western-blot analysis revealed some differences in protein distribution along the epididymis when compared to the transcripts expression pattern. These results contribute to the understanding of the causes of the persistent of infertility even though spermogram values suggest surgical success of vasovasostomy. Keywords: Tissue compartments comparison

