TITLE
Curcumin affects gene expression and reactive oxygen species via a PKA dependent mechanism in Dictyostelium discoideum

ORGANISM
Dictyostelium discoideum

SUMMARY
Botanicals are widely used as dietary supplements and for the prevention and treatment of disease.  Despite a long history of use, there is generally little evidence supporting the efficacy and safety of these preparations.  Curcumin has been used to treat a myriad of human diseases and is widely advertised and marketed for its ability to improve health, but there is no clear understanding how curcumin interacts with cells and affects cell physiology.  D. discoideum is a simple eukaryotic lead system that allows both tractable genetic and biochemical studies.  The studies reported here show novel effects of curcumin on cell proliferation and physiology, and a pleiotropic effect on gene transcription.  Transcriptome analysis showed that the effect is two-phased with an early transient effect on the transcription of approximately 5% of the genome, and demonstrates that cells respond to curcumin through a variety of previously unknown molecular pathways.  This is followed by later unique transcriptional changes and a protein kinase A dependent decrease in catalase A and three superoxide dismutase enzymes.  Although this results in an increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS; superoxide and H2O2), the effects of curcumin on transcription do not appear to be the direct result of oxidation.  This study opens the door to future explorations of the effect of curcumin on cell physiology.

DESIGN
Total 48 samples were used for this analysis. Transcriptomes of AX4 strain treated with curcumin at multiple concentrations (0, 2.5, 5.0, 7.5 and 10.0 µg/ml) for different durations (0, 4, 8 and 12 hour) were analyzed with 3 biological replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL9379 Illumina Genome Analyzer II (Dictyostelium discoideum)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

LIBSTRATS
:RNA-SEQ
