TITLE
The histone variant H2A.Z promotes efficient co-transcriptional splicing in S. cerevisiae

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
In eukaryotes, a dynamic ribonucleic protein machine known as the spliceosome catalyzes the removal of introns from pre-messenger RNA (pre-mRNA). Recent studies show the process of RNA-synthesis and RNA-processing to be spatio-temporally coordinated, indicating that RNA splicing takes place in the context of chromatin. H2A.Z is a highly conserved histone variant of the canonical histone H2A. In S. cerevisiae, H2A.Z is deposited into chromatin by the SWR1-complex, is found near the 5’ ends of protein-coding genes, and has been implicated in transcription regulation. Here we show that splicing of intron-containing genes in cells lacking H2A.Z is impaired, particularly under suboptimal splicing conditions. Cells lacking H2A.Z are especially dependent on a functional U2 snRNP, as H2A.Z shows extensive genetic interactions with U2 snRNP associated proteins, and RNA-seq reveals introns with non-consensus branch points are particularly sensitive to H2A.Z loss. Consistently, H2A.Z promotes efficient spliceosomal rearrangements involving the U2 snRNP, as H2A.Z loss results in persistent U2 snRNP association and decreased recruitment of downstream snRNPs to nascent RNA. H2A.Z impairs transcription elongation, suggesting that spliceosome rearrangements are tied to H2A.Z’s role in elongation. Depletion of disassembly factor Prp43 suppresses H2A.Z-mediated splice defects, indicating that, in the absence of H2A.Z, stalled spliceosomes are disassembled and unspliced RNAs are released. Together these data demonstrate that H2A.Z is required for efficient pre-mRNA splicing and indicate a role for H2A.Z in coordinating the kinetics of transcription elongation and splicing.

DESIGN
Transcriptomes of 11 different cell types in S. cerevisiae generated by sequencing of one to two independent preparations of rRNA-depleteted RNA libraries

PLATFORM
GPL13821 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)

CITATIONS
28446598

