TITLE
Hepatic Transcriptional Profiling of Hatchling Chicks and Market-age Broiler Chickens during Fasting and Re-feeding

ORGANISM
Gallus gallus

SUMMARY
This study integrates global transcriptional profiling and the metabolic perturbation induced by fasting and re-feeding. Genetic control of growth and development should be revealed by systematic modeling of metabolic and regulatory pathways. Chicken oligo arrays were used for transcriptional profiling in two time-course experiments. Two critical developmental stages were chosen: immediately after hatchling (Wk1) and prior to marketing of broiler chickens (Wk6). Only male chickens were used to simplify the experimental design. A RNA reference design was employed for microarray hybridization using two reference RNA pools derived from all individuals sampled at either Wk1 or Wk6. Microarray data was acquired using GenePix Pro software. Loess normalization and a linear mixed model were applied in data processing using the R statistical package with LIMMA software [Smyth, G. K. (2004) Linear models and empirical Bayes methods for assessing differential expression in microarray experiments. Statistical Applications in Genetics and Molecular Biology, Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 3]. The results show hundreds of differentially expressed genes, which are regulated by age and the metabolic perturbation of fasting and re-feeding. Numerous common genes were found at both developmental stages (Wk1 and Wk6) that could be candidates for controlling growth and development of chickens. Differential expression revealed by either microarray or qRT-PCR analyses of selected genes was highly consistent. QRT-PCR verification of genes acutely depressed by fasting includes AGO1, ANGTPL3, ATPCL, FASN, FAT, ME1, PPARG, SCD1, SREBP1 and THRSPA. Genes up-regulated by fasting were ALDOB, IL-15, LDHB, LIPIN2, PANK1, PPARA and UPP2. These genes are functionally assigned to metabolic enzymes, transcription factors, acute phase proteins, immune factors and involved in various pathways (i.e., fatty acid and amino acid metabolism, glycolysis, growth factor signaling and immune defense). Keywords: Hepatic transcripts, oligo-array, chicken, metabolic perturbation, fasting and re-feeding

DESIGN
A reference RNA design was used for microarray hybridizations, where the same reference RNA pool was co-hybridized to each target sample on an microarray. The reference RNA pool was made from an equal amount of high-quality amplified RNA (aRNA), derived from all liver samples within each experiment (Wk1 = 50 samples and Wk6 = 30 samples). The reference RNA pool was labeled with Alexa 647 while each target sample was labeled with Alexa 555.

PLATFORM
GPL6049 Arizona Gallus gallus 20.7K Oligo Array v1.0

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

