TITLE
Regulation of gene expression in MDAMB231 breast cancer cells by Parvin-beta in 2D vs 3D culture conditions

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Parvin-beta is a focal adhesion protein downregulated in human breast cancer cells.  Loss of Parvin-beta contributes to increased integrin-linked kinase activity, cell-matrix adhesion, and invasion through the extracellular matrix in vitro.  The effect of ectopic Parvin-beta expression on the transcriptional profile of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, which normally do not express Parvin-beta was evaluated.  Particular emphasis was placed upon propagating MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells in three-dimensional culture matrices. Gene expression profiles of vector control and Parvin-beta transfected MDA-MB-231 cells cultured on (A) monomeric type I collagen coated plastic, (B) embedded in a type I collagen gel, and (C) embedded in basement membrane (growth factor reduced Matrigel), were compared.  Interestingly, Parvin-beta re-expression in MDA-MB-231 cells increased the mRNA expression, serine 82 phosphorylation (mediated by CDK9), and activity of the nuclear hormone receptor, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) and a concomitant increase in lipogenic gene expression as a downstream effector of PPARgamma.  Importantly, Parvin-beta suppressed breast cancer growth in vivo with associated decreased proliferation. These data suggest that Parvin-beta might influence breast cancer progression.. Keywords: Gene expression profiling in two dimensional vs three dimensional cell culture

DESIGN
The MDA-MB-0231 transfectants were cultured for 7 days in each growth condition and total RNA isolated using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen). Genes either upregulated or downregulated in Parvin-beta transfectants versus vector control cells were compared among the 3 different growth conditions. Venn diagrams were generated using GeneSpring software and used to produce gene lists that were unique to a particular growth condition, or shared between two or all three growth conditions. The focus was primarily on gene expression alterations observed in the 3D collagen type I and 3D Matrigel conditions.

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
17998334

