TITLE
Genome-wide survey prior to head formation reveals new insights into the molecular basis of high temperature stress in tolerant and sensitive broccoli genotypes

ORGANISM
Brassica oleracea var. italica

SUMMARY
Warmer temperature is predicted to have negative effects on transition from vegetative to reproductive development in plants. The production of floral head in broccoli (Brassica oleracea var. italica) is dramatically reduced because of the high temperature stress. The broccoli inbred lines that are capable of producing head at high temperature in summer are unique varieties in Taiwan. However, knowledge of signalling pathway during the broccoli head formation under heat stress is limited. In this study, heat-tolerance (HT) and heat-sensitive (HS) broccoli genotypes were used to determine the effects of temperatures on the floral head development. We compared the transcription level of the HT and HS genotypes transcriptome under different temperatures ranging from 15 to 27 C. According to weighted correlation network analysis, the high temperature (27 C) activated calcium signalling pathways and mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades in both HT and HS lines. Noticeably, the genes involved in these pathways were expressed to lower level in HT than those of HS. The expression level of genes coding for heat-shock elements was lower in HT than HS. BoFLC1, a key regulator of flowering initiation, was expressed significantly lower in HT at 22 and 27 C but expressed higher in HS. Other FLC homologues were expressed to similar levels between HT and HS.

DESIGN
Combimatrix microarray technology were applied to obtain a general overview of the gene expression in shoot meristem of a tolerant and a sensitive broccoli genotype. We analyzed three temperature (15, 22, and 27 degree C) for each genotype. For each sample we performed three biological replicates.

PLATFORM
GPL15739 Agilent-022520 Brassica napus 4x44K (Probe Name version)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

