TITLE
Trisomy 21 fibroblasts (pevsn-affy-human-512801)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Down syndrome (DS) is caused by an extra copy of chromosome 21. We are characterizing protein changes in human skin fibroblasts. We propose to study corresponding changes at the DNA level (by SNP analysis) and the RNA level (using Affymetrix chips). These studies will detail transcriptional and translational regulation in trisomy. The Specific Aim is to obtain data on RNA transcript levels using Affymetrix expression arrays in a group of trisomy 21 and euploid fibroblast cell lines. In parallel, we will acquire SNP data to determine both genotype (call) and copy number changes for trisomic samples. The results will allow us to identify the patterns of change in a trisomic chromosome (relative to control). [1] We hypothesize that in genomic DNA samples derived from trisomy 21 (TS21) fibroblasts there will be an increased copy number on chr21 with additional microdeletions and microdeletions. [2] We hypothesize that the RNA transcripts derived from chr21 will be elevated relative to euploid controls. [3] We hypothesize that altered RNA transcript levels will be significantly correlated with altered protein levels from these same fibroblast cell lines. The experimental design is as follows. All samples are from deidentified individuals and were obtained from the Brain and Tissue Bank for Developmental Disorders at the University of Maryland, with Johns Hopkins IRB approval.[1] There are five trisomy 21 samples and five euploid samples (total n=10). Fibroblasts were grown in culture to comparable confluency and passage number. Cells were harvested. Total RNA was isolated with a Qiagen kit. The quantity and purity of the RNA was confirmed by spectrophotometry and by electrophoresing an aliquot on a 1% agarose gel. Approximately 10 micrograms of total RNA will be sent to TGen on dry ice for analysis on Affymetrix U133 PlusTwo arrays. Data analysis will be with Affymetrix and Partek software. Keywords: other

