TITLE
Histone modification (H3K4me3, H3K27ac, and H3K27me3) change during EBV infection in gastric epithelial cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Aberrant DNA hypermethylation is a major epigenetic mechanism to inactivate tumor suppressor genes in cancer, and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) positive gastric cancer is known as the most frequently hypermethylated tumor among whole human malignancies. We here performed comprehensive analysis of epigenomic alteration during EBV infection, by Infinium HumanMethylation 450K BeadChip for DNA methylation and ChIP-sequencing for histone modification alteration. While 7,727 genes showed increase of DNA methylation in a promoter region, roughly half of these were “DNA methylation-sensitive” genes including anti-oncogenic genes e.g. CDKN2A and CDH1, which acquired DNA methylation in the whole promoter regions, thus leading to gene repression. Another half were “DNA methylation-resistant” genes including DNA repair genes, where DNA methylation is acquired in the surrounding of promoter regions but unmethylated status is protected in the vicinity of transcription start site, with gene expression retained. Histone modification alteration also occurred dynamically during EBV infection, in coordinated manner with DNA methylation alteration. DNA methylation-sensitive genes significantly correlated with loss of H3K27me3 pre-marks or decrease of active histone marks e.g. H3K4me3 and H3K27ac, and apoptosis-related genes were significantly enriched in these epigenetically repressed genes. Gain of active histone marks significantly correlated with DNA methylation-resistant genes, and genes related to mitotic cell cycle and DNA repair were significantly enriched in these epigenetically activated genes. Orchestrated epigenetic alterations play an important role in gene regulation during EBV infection, and histone modification status in promoter regions significantly associated with acquisition of de novo DNA methylation or protection of unmethylated status at TSS.

DESIGN
Examination of 3 different histone modifications in EBV infected or uninfected gastric cancer cells.

PLATFORM
GPL10999 Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx (Homo sapiens) GPL18460 Illumina HiSeq 1500 (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
28801683

