TITLE
Gene expression profiling of oral squamous cell carcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Abstract BACKGROUND: Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is a frequent neoplasm, which is usually aggressive and has unpredictable biological behavior and unfavorable prognosis. The comprehension of the molecular basis of this variability should lead to the development of targeted therapies as well as to improvements in specificity and sensitivity of diagnosis. RESULTS: Samples of primary OSCCs and their corresponding surgical margins were obtained from male patients during surgery and their gene expression profiles were screened using whole-genome microarray technology. Hierarchical clustering and Principal Components Analysis were used for data visualization and One-way Analysis of Variance was used to identify differentially expressed genes. Samples clustered mostly according to disease subsite, suggesting molecular heterogeneity within tumor stages. In order to corroborate our results, two publicly available datasets of microarray experiments were assessed. We found significant molecular differences between OSCC anatomic subsites concerning groups of genes presently or potentially important for drug development, including mRNA processing, cytoskeleton organization and biogenesis, metabolic process, cell cycle and apoptosis. CONCLUSION: Our results corroborate literature data on molecular heterogeneity of OSCCs. Differences between disease subsites and among samples belonging to the same TNM class highlight the importance of gene expression-based classification and challenge the development of targeted therapies.

DESIGN
Nine tumor samples differing in their TNM classification and their respective surgical margins were used in this study. They were obtained from individual patients during tongue and floor of the mouth tumor resection surgery. Microarray experiments were carried out using the microarray platform CodeLink (GE Healthcare). This platform utilizes bioarrays consisting of 30-base, single pre-validated oligonucleotide probe per gene target. CodeLink Whole-Genome  bioarrays, containing 55,000 human transcripts, were used for all experiments. Hybridization procedures strictly followed protocols provided by the manufacturer (GE Healthcare). A total of 11 arrays were hybridized in this study. Arrays were scanned following the recommended scanning procedure and settings for use with CodeLink bioarrays (GE Healthcare) on GenePix 4000B Array Scanner/GenePix Pro 4.0 software (Axon Instruments).

PLATFORM
GPL6248 GE Healthcare CodeLink Human Whole Genome Bioarray

CITATIONS
19014556

