TITLE
Expression of inflammatory and structural matrix genes in synovial fluid following intra-articular administration of isoflupredone acetate to exercised horses

ORGANISM
Equus caballus

SUMMARY
In the current study, we use gene expression approach to assess the effects and duration of action of IPA on the expression levels of genes encoding pro and anti-inflammatory genes and structural proteins in an exercised horse model.Equine specific microarrays containing expression profiling of 25,923 genes were used.  Baseline samples collected the day prior to IPA administration were compared to those collected at 24 hours and on day 7 and samples from day 7 compared to 24 hours.  The volcano plots of differentially expressed abundant transcripts generated from microarray analysis are depicted in Figure 2.  Comparison of baseline samples to 24 hours revealed 855 differentially expressed genes with 632 genes up-regulated and 223 genes down regulated.  Comparison of baseline samples to those collected on day 7 showed 23,358 genes differentially expressed with 23,318 genes up-regulated and 40 down regulated.  When samples from day 7 were compared to 24 hours, 26,411 genes were differentially expressed with 26,409 genes up-regulated and 2 genes down regulated.  Based on the results of the microarray analysis (greatest fold change and statistical significance), 20 genes were chosen for further analysis to quantitate the change in expression levels, relative to baseline, at several time points post drug administration.

DESIGN
Twelve university owned exercised adult Thoroughbred horses including 6 geldings and 6 mares age: 4-8 years; weight: 492-600 kg) were studied.  Horses did not receive corticosteroids or any other intra-articular medications for at least one year and any other medications for at least two weeks prior to commencement of the study.  This study was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of California, Davis. Each horse was weighed the morning of drug administration and a 14- gauge catheter placed in the external jugular vein for blood sampling. Immediately prior to drug administration, the area over the right antebrachiocarpal joint was scrubbed with betadine solutionc and 70% isopropyl alcohol, the joint flexed and a total dose of 8 mg of IPA (Predef® 2X)d  or 0.9% saline administered aseptically into the right joint. Two days after synovial fluid collection, horses were allowed to freely exercise in a round pen.  Horses returned to their regular exercise regimen on day 3 post drug administration.  The IPA dose chosen for this study was based upon a published survey of the most commonly used dose by equine practitioners [ Ferris, D.J, 2009].

PLATFORM
GPL18123 [EquGene-1_0-st] Equus caballus Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

