TITLE
Integrative analysis of RNA Polymerase II and transcriptional dynamics upon Myc activation [ChIP-seq]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Over-expression of the Myc transcription factor causes its widespread interaction with regulatory domains in the genome, but leads to the up- and down-regulation of discrete sets of genes. The molecular determinants of these selective transcriptional responses remain elusive. Here, we present an integrated time-course analysis of transcription and mRNA dynamics following Myc activation in proliferating mouse fibroblasts, based on chromatin immunoprecipitation, metabolic labeling of newly synthesized RNA, extensive sequencing and mathematical modeling. Transcriptional activation correlated with the highest increases in Myc binding at promoters. Repression followed a reciprocal scenario, with the lowest gains in Myc binding. Altogether, the relative abundance (henceforth, “share”) of Myc at promoters was the strongest predictor of transcriptional responses in diverse cell types, predominating over Myc’s association with the co-repressor Miz1. Myc activation elicited immediate loading of RNAPII at activated promoters, followed by increases in pause-release5, while repressed promoters showed opposite effects. Gains and losses in RNAPII loading were proportional to the changes in the Myc share, suggesting that repression by Myc may be largely indirect, owing - at least in part - to competition for limiting amounts of RNAPII. Secondary to the changes in RNAPII loading, the dynamics of elongation and pre-mRNA processing were also rapidly altered at Myc regulated genes, leading to the transient accumulation of partially or aberrantly processed mRNAs. Altogether, our results shed light on how over-expressed Myc alters the various phases of the RNAPII cycle and the resulting transcriptional response.

DESIGN
Time course profiling of Myc binding, RNAPII binding upon Myc activation in 3T9-MycER mouse fibroblasts and Miz1 binding in non-activated 3T9-MycER mouse fibroblasts and Primary B-cells

PLATFORM
GPL13112 Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

