TITLE
Gene expression analysis of ex-Foxp3 Th2 cells during Heligmosomoides polygyrus infection

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Gene expression of Treg cells that have lost Foxp3 expression and acquired Il4 expression following adoptive transfer into T-cell deficient mice (HpTR-IL-4gfp+), cmpared to conventional Treg cells isolated from H. polygyrus-infected wild-type mice (HpTR) and Th2 cells generated from naïve T cells following adoptive transfer into H. polygyrus-infected T-cell deficient mice (nT-IL-4gfp+). Immunity to intestinal helminth infections requires the rapid activation of T helper 2 (Th2) cells. However, simultaneous expansion of regulatory CD4+Foxp3+ T (Treg) cells impedes protective responses, resulting in chronic infections. The ratio between regulatory and effector T cells can therefore determine the outcome of infection. The re-differentiation of Treg into T helper (Th) cells has been identified in hyper-inflammatory diseases. In this study, we asked whether ex-Treg Th2 cells develop and contribute to type 2 immunity. Using multi-gene reporter and fate-reporter systems we demonstrate that a significant proportion of Th2 cells derive from Foxp3+ cells following Heligmosomoides polygyrus infection and airway allergy. Ex-Foxp3 Th2 cells exhibit characteristic Th2 effector functions and provide immunity to H. polygyrus. Through selective deletion of Il4ra on Foxp3+ cells, we further demonstrate IL-4 is required for the development of ex-Foxp3 Th2 cells. Collectively, our findings indicate that converting Treg cells into Th2 cells could concomitantly enhance Th2 cells and limit Treg-mediated suppression.   

DESIGN
Naïve T cells were FACS-sorted from naive wild-type mice. HpTR cells were FACS-sorted from H. polygyrus-infected mice. HpTR cells and nT cells were transferred to T-cell deficient mice infected with H. polygyrus. IL-4gfp-expressing cells were FACS-sorted from HpTR (HpTR-IL-4gfp+) or nT (nT-IL-4gfp+) recipients. 3 biological samples were obtained from 3 independent experiments for each sample group.

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
28507062

