TITLE
p27 haploinsufficiency in rats associates with invasive medullary thyroid carcinoma

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
CDKN1B (p27) was formally established as a tumor suppressor gene (tsg) following the identification of inactivating germline mutations in rats (MENX syndrome) and patients (MEN4 syndrome) developing multiple neuroendocrine tumors (NETs). MENX-affected rats are homozygous for the predisposing p27 mutation, suggesting a canonical tsg function. In contrast, mice heterozygous for a defective Cdkn1b allele are already predisposed to tumor formation (haploinsufficiency). We here report that heterozygous mutant rats (p27+/mut) develop the same NETs seen in the homozygous (p27mut/mut) animals but with slower progression. In the tumors of p27+/mut rats, the wild-type allele is neither lost nor silenced, implying that p27 is haploinsufficient for tumor suppression also in this model. Transcriptome profiling of rat NETs having different p27 dosages revealed a tissue-specific, dose-dependent effect of p27 on gene expression. In p27+/mut rats, thyroid neoplasms progress to invasive and metastatic medullary thyroid carcinomas (MTCs) accompanied by increased calcitonin levels, as in humans. Comparison of expression signatures of late-stage versus early-stage MTCs from p27+/mut rats identified genes potentially involved in tumor aggressiveness. The expression of a subset of these genes was evaluated in human MTCs, and found associated with aggressive RET-M918T-positive tumors. Altogether, p27 haploinsufficiency in MENX rats uncovered a novel, representative model of invasive/metastatic MTC, exploitable for translational studies of this aggressive and often incurable cancer.

DESIGN
We compared medullary thyroid carcinomas from heterozygous and homozygous p27Kip1/Cdkn1b mutant rats. Heterozygous animals were analyzed at the age of 9 and 18 months

PLATFORM
GPL6247 [RaGene-1_0-st] Affymetrix Rat Gene 1.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

