TITLE
Hic-5 regulates epithelial to mesenchymal transition in ovarian cancer cells in a TGFβ1-independent manner

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The molecular basis of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) dissemination is still poorly understood. We have previously identified the hydrogen peroxide-inducible clone-5 (Hic-5) gene as hypomethylated in high-grade (HG) serous EOC tumors, compared to normal ovarian tissues. Hic-5 is a focal adhesion scaffold protein and has been primarily studied for its role as a key mediator of TGF-β–induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in epithelial cells of both normal and malignant origin; however, its role in EOC has been never investigated. Here we demonstrate that Hic-5 is overexpressed in advanced EOC, and that Hic-5 is upregulated upon TGFβ1 treatment in the EOC cell line with epithelial morphology (A2780s), associated with EMT induction. However, ectopic expression of Hic-5 in A2780s induces alone EMT, accompanied with enhancement of their proliferation rate and migratory/invasive capacity and increased resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs. Moreover, Hic-5 knockdown in the EOC cell lines with mesenchymal morphology (SKOV3), was accompanied by induction of mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET), followed by a reduction of their proliferative, migratory and invasive capacity, and increased drugs sensitivity in vitro and enhanced tumor cell colonization and metastatic growth in vivo. The modulation of Hic-5 expression in EOC cells resulted in altered regulation of numerous EMT-related canonical pathways and was indicative for a possible role of Hic-5 in controlling EMT through a RhoA/ROCK mediated mechanism. To our knowledge, this is the first report examining the role of Hic-5 in EOC, and its role in maintaining the mesenchymal phenotype of EOC cells independently of exogenous TGFβ1 treatment.

DESIGN
To better understand the molecular mechanisms of Hic-5 gene action in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC), we employed the Agilent Whole Human Genome microarrays, containing ~ 44,000 genes to identify global gene expression changes upon  Hic-5 suppression in SKOV3 EOC cells and Hic-5 overexpression in A2780s cells. We compared the gene expression of the previously selected  shRNA-mediated Hic-5 -knockdown clones sh-S1 and sh-S2  and the ectopically Hic-5 expressing clone pCMV-Hic-5 against the corresponding control (C) clones . The microarray experiments were performed in duplicates, as two hybridizations were carried out for each of the Hic-5-suppressing cell clones and the Hic-5-overexpressing clone against the corresponding controls, using a fluorescent dye reversal (dye-swap) technique.

