TITLE
Hippocampal Gene Expression Profile of Mitogen Stress activated Kinase 1 (MSK1) null mice.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Analysis of alterations in the hippocampus transcriptome caused by deletion of Mitogen Stress activated Kinase 1 (MSK1). MAPK signaling has been implicated in a wide range of neuronal processes,  including development, plasticity and viability. One of the principal  downstream targets of both the ERK/MAPK pathway and the p38 MAPK  pathway is Mitogen Stress activated Kinase 1 (MSK1). Here, we sought to  understand the role that MSK1 plays in neuroprotection against excitotoxic  stimulation in the hippocampus. To this end, we utilized a MSK1 null mouse  line, cell viability assays and array-based profiling approaches. Here we  show that MSK1 is broadly expressed within the major neuronal cell layers  of the hippocampus and that status epilepticus (SE) drives acute induction  of MSK1 activation. In response to the SE paradigm, MSK1 KO mice  exhibited a striking increase in vulnerability to pilocarpine-evoked cell  death within the CA1 and CA3 cell layers. Further, cultured MSK1 null  neurons exhibited a heighted level of NMDA-evoked excitotoxicity relative  to WT neurons, as assessed using the LDH assay. Given these findings, we  examined the hippocampal transcriptional profile of MSK1 null  mice. Affymetrix array profiling revealed that with MSK1 deletion a total of 115 genes showed  significant changes ( > 1.25-fold) in expression. Notably, functional analysis indicated that a subset of these  genes contribute to neuroprotective signaling networks. Together, these  data provide important new insights into the mechanism by which the  MAPK/MSK1 signaling cassette confers neuroprotection against excitotoxic  insults. Approaches designed to upregulate or mimic the functional effects  of MSK1 may prove beneficial against an array of degenerative processes  resulting from excitotoxic insults.           MAPK signaling has been implicated in a wide range of neuronal processes,  including development, plasticity and viability. One of the principal  downstream targets of both the ERK/MAPK pathway and the p38 MAPK  pathway is Mitogen Stress activated Kinase 1 (MSK1). Here, we sought to  understand the role that MSK1 plays in neuroprotection against excitotoxic  stimulation in the hippocampus. To this end, we utilized a MSK1 null mouse  line, cell viability assays and array-based profiling approaches. Here we  show that MSK1 is broadly expressed within the major neuronal cell layers  of the hippocampus and that status epilepticus (SE) drives acute induction  of MSK1 activation. In response to the SE paradigm, MSK1 KO mice  exhibited a striking increase in vulnerability to pilocarpine-evoked cell  death within the CA1 and CA3 cell layers. Further, cultured MSK1 null  neurons exhibited a heighted level of NMDA-evoked excitotoxicity relative  to WT neurons, as assessed using the LDH assay. Given these findings, we  examined the hippocampal transcriptional profile of MSK1 null  mice. Affymetrix array profiling revealed that with MSK1 deletion a total of 115 genes showed  significant changes ( > 1.25-fold) in expression. Notably, functional analysis indicated that a subset of these  genes contribute to neuroprotective signaling networks. Together, these  data provide important new insights into the mechanism by which the  MAPK/MSK1 signaling cassette confers neuroprotection against excitotoxic  insults. Approaches designed to upregulate or mimic the functional effects  of MSK1 may prove beneficial against an array of degenerative processes  resulting from excitotoxic insults.

DESIGN
We profiled total RNA from bilateral hippocampal tissue obtained from 6 mice, corresponding to 3 animals per genotype (wild type and MSK1 null) using the GeneChip 430A 2.0 Mouse Genome Array. Raw data (.cel files) were processed using dChip software ( http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/cli/complab/dchip/ ).

PLATFORM
GPL1261 [Mouse430_2] Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
28870089

