TITLE
Transcriptome analysis of lysozyme treated S. gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus [BAA-2069]

ORGANISM
Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus ATCC BAA-2069

SUMMARY
Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus is a commensal of the human gastrointestinal tract and a pathogen of infective endocarditis and other biofilm-associated infections with exposed collagen. Therefore, this study focuses on the characterization of the biofilm formation and collagen adhesion of S. gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus under different conditions. It has been observed that lysozyme triggers biofilm formation divergently in the analyzed S. gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus strains. The transcriptome analysis was performed for two strains which form more biofilm in the presence of lysozyme. Lysozyme leads to higher expression of genes of transcription and translation, of the dlt operon (cell wall modification), of hydrogen peroxide resistance proteins and of two immunity proteins which could be involved in biofilm formation. Furthermore, the adhesion ability of 73 different S. gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus strains to collagen type I and IV was analyzed. High adhesion ability was observed for the strain UCN 34, whereas the strain DSM 16831 adhered only marginally to collagen. The full genome microarray analysis revealed strain-dependent gene expression due to adhesion. The expression of genes of a transposon and a phage region in strain DSM 16831 were increased, which corresponds to lateral gene transfer. Adherence to collagen leads to a change in the expression of genes of nutrients uptake in the strain UCN 34.

DESIGN
Analysis of two S. gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus strains (BAA-2069 and UCN 34) in BHI medium with 10 mg/ml lysozyme compared to control (BHI medium without lysozym) after 5 hours of incubation. For each strain and condition three biological replicates were taken and normalized on the control without lysozyme.

PLATFORM
GPL23196 Agilent-072445 ArrayXS_S.gallolyticus_01-2015 [gene version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

