TITLE
MicroRNA expression in preoperative chemoradiotherapy for rectal cancer (LARC)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The incorporation of chemoradiation prior to resection of the tumour has revolutionized the management of locally advanced rectal cancer. However, a large proportion of these patients are resistant to preoperative treatment schedule. We recently reported that c-Myc gene expression correlates negatively with this resistance in patients with rectal cancer. In this study, we carried out integrated analysis of miRNA and mRNA expression profiling in 45 pre-treatment rectal tumour. Further, expression of miRNAs and c-Myc, and their relationship with clinicopathological factors and patient survival was analysed. As a result, we found that 12 miRNAs were differentially expressed between responder and non-responder rectal cancer patients. Functional classification revealed an association between differentially expressed miRNAs and c-Myc. Subsequent quantitative real-time PCR results showed that both, miRNA-148 and miRNA-375 levels were significantly lower in responder compared to non-responder patients. Notably, the higher level of miRNA-375 was significantly negatively correlated with c-Myc. These results suggest that miRNA-375 and its targeted c-Myc play an important role as predictive biomarker of response to neoadjuvant treatment in patients with locally advanced rectal cancer, but still not suitable for prognosis. Pre-treatment biopsies of 22 patients with LARC were prospectively collected and freshly frozen according to an institutional board-approved protocol. Tumour response was assessed in surgical specimens by pathological examination based on the semi-quantitative tumour regression grading (TRG) system described by Mandard in 1994[36]: TRG1 and TRG2 scores were considered responders, whereas TRG3, TRG4, and TRG5 were classified as non-responders. The inclusion criteria were: histologically proven rectal tumour at a clinical stage UICC II-III (cT3-4/and or N positive), following endorectal ultrasound and/or MRI scan. Patients were excluded if they had the tumour located above 13 cm from the anal verge by rigid rectoscopy, synchronic colonic cancer assessed by colonoscopy, distant metastases by 18FDG PET-CT scan, and suspicion of hereditary colorectal cancer. All patients subsequently received a total dose of 50.4Gy of radiation (28 fractions of 1.8Gy) associated with capecitabine (oral form of 5-FU) with or without oxaliplatine, according to our Hospital Clinical Practice Guidelines. Standardized Surgery was performed, including total mesorectal excision, following an interval of 8-10 weeks after completion of CT/RT.

DESIGN
22 samples of preoperative chemoradiotherapy LARC samples (10 from responders and 12 from non-responders) were profiled on a total of 35 TaqMan® OpenArray® MicroRNA Plates (Life Technologies), consisting of DNA probes synthesized in situ that represent 754 human miRNAs from the Sanger miRBase (Version 14), using the one-color technique in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Replicates of the 22 samples were profiled in different plates.

PLATFORM
GPL19162 TaqMan OpenArray Human MicroRNA Panel (4461104; 'miRNA_ID+assay ID' verion)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

