TITLE
Transcriptomic analysis of purified human cortical microglia reveals age-associated changes

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens ; Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Purpose: Microglia are essential for central nervous system (CNS) homeostasis and innate neuroimmune function, and play important roles in neurodegeneration and brain aging. Here, we present gene expression profiles of purified microglia isolated at autopsy from the parietal cortex of 39 human subjects with intact cognition. We identified an age-associated gene signature in human microglia that was enriched for genes involved in cell adhesion, axonal guidance, cell surface receptor expression, and actin disassembly. Methods: mRNA profiles of 39 human microglia samples isolated from subjects with intact cognition, 16 corresponding superior parietal cortex tissue and 10 epilepsy surgical samples were generated in a Illumina HiSEQ 2500 sequencer. mRNA profiles of 6 parietal cortex from mice were prepared with a Quantseq 3’mRNA-Seq kit (Lexogen, USA). Reads were aligned to the hg38 assembly of the human genome using STAR and quantified at the gene level by featureCounts. Differential expression between whole brain tissue, surgical samples and isolated microglia was assessed with limma. Results: Overall, genes expressed by human microglia are similar to those in mouse, including established microglia genes CX3CR1, P2YR12, and ITGAM/CD11B. However, a number of immune genes, not identified as part of the mouse microglial signature, were abundantly expressed in human microglia, including TLR, Fc-gamma and SIGLEC receptors, as well as TAL1 and IFI16, regulators of proliferation and cell cycle. Age-associated changes in human microglia were enriched for genes involved in cell adhesion, axonal guidance, cell surface receptor expression, and actin (dis)assembly. Limited overlap was observed in microglial genes regulated during aging between mice and humans, indicating that human and mouse microglia age differently. Conclusions: Here we present the an extensive human microglia gene expression profile. Critical differences with mouse microglia, especially in the context of aging, were observed which highlight the necessity to independently study human microglia. These data and analyses serve as a starting point to address human-specific microglia genes and functions under physiological and neuropathological conditions.

DESIGN
mRNA profiles of 39 human microglia samples isolated from subjects with intact cognition, 16 corresponding superior parietal cortex tissue and 10 epilepsy surgical samples were generated in a Illumina HiSEQ 2500 sequencer. mRNA profiles of 6 parietal cortex from mice were prepared with a Quantseq 3’mRNA-Seq kit (Lexogen, USA).

PLATFORM
GPL16791 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Homo sapiens) GPL17021 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Mus musculus)

CITATIONS
28671693

