TITLE
Effect of neurotrophin p75 receptor (p75NTR) on angiogenesis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Neurotrophins (NTs) promotes angiogenesis and EC survival, via tropomyosin kinase trkA and trkB receptors. A different p75NTR receptor of NTs, which belongs to the TNF-alfa receptor superfamily, is not or scarcely expressed by endothelial cells (EC) and endothelial progenitor cells (EPC) under basal conditions. Both diabetes and muscular ischemia induce p75NTR in capillary EC. In this study, by gene transfer, we forced the expression of p75NTR in EC and EPC to study the effect on cell survival, proliferation, adhesion, migration, and capillary-like tubes formation on matrigel, which all resulted impaired by p75NTR. We identified that p75NTR inhibits the VEGF-A/Akt/eNOS/NO pro-angiogenesis/pro-EC survival pathway and reduces the mRNA contents of survivin and securin in EC. By Illumina technology and real-time PCR, we found that p75-NTR alters the expression of VEGF-A and beta-1 integrin, which are implicated in angiogenesis and cell survival. p75NTR transfer to ischemic murine limb muscles impaired neoangiogenesis and blood flow recovery and induced apoptosis of bone marrow Sca-1+/Lin- progenitor cells. Diabetes induced p75NTR in bone marrow Sca-1+/Lin- cells and this correlated with apoptosis. Finally, inhibition of p75NTR signaling in diabetic ischemic limb muscles restored proper muscular neovascularization and blood flow recovery. Keywords: Response to ectopic receptor expression on angiogenesis

DESIGN
Two series of 4 mice each were treated with either control adenovirus (AdNull) or adenovirus expressing neurotrophin p75 receptor (AdP75). Anaesthetized mice received 3 adenovirus injections (for a total of 109 p.f.u. virus in 20 micro L) into 3 equidistant sites of the normoperfused or ischemic left adductor muscles, as described (2.	Emanueli C, Graiani G, Salis MB, Gadau S, Desortes E, Madeddu P. Prophylactic gene therapy with human tissue kallikrein ameliorates limb ischemia recovery in type 1 diabetic mice. Diabetes. 2004 Apr;53(4):1096-103. )

PLATFORM
GPL6283 Illumina Sentrix mouse-6.v1 bead array

CITATIONS
18566344

