TITLE
The genomic-level expression patterns of human mononuclear cells subjected heat shock or lipopolysaccharide stress

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Direct comparison of the genome-level expression patterns of THP-1 cells exposed to either LPS or heat shock Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) serve a sentinel role allowing the host to efficiently sense and adapt to the presence of danger signals. Herein we have directly compared the genome-level expression patterns (microarray) of human PBMC (THP-1 cells) subjected to one of two canonical danger signals, heat shock and lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Based on sequential expression and statistical filters, and in comparison to control cells, we found that 3,988 genes were differentially regulated in THP-1 cells subjected to LPS stress, and 2,921 genes were differentially regulated in THP-1 cells subjected to heat shock stress. Venn analyses demonstrated that the majority of differentially regulated genes (greather than or equal to 70%) were uniquely expressed in response to one of the two danger signals. Functional analyses demonstrated that the two danger signals induced expression or repression of genes corresponding to unique pathways, molecular functions, biological processes, and gene networks. In contrast, there were 184 genes that were commonly upregulated by both stress signals, and 430 genes that were commonly downregulated by both stress signals. Interestingly, the 184 commonly upregulated genes corresponded to a gene network broadly related to inflammation, and more specifically to chemokine signaling. These data demonstrate that the mononuclear cell responses to the canonical stress signals, heat shock and LPS, are highly divergent. However, there is a heretofore unrecognized common pattern of gene network expression corresponding to chemokine-related biology. The data also serve as a reference database for investigators in the field of stress signaling. Keywords: treated vs non treated

DESIGN
In vitro exposure of THP-1 cells to control conditions, LPS (1 micogram/ml for 4 hrs), or heat shock (43 deg C for 1 hour, followed by a 4 hour recovery at 37 deg C)

PLATFORM
GPL570 [HG-U133_Plus_2] Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

