TITLE
Differential Gene Expression Between Brown Norway and Sprague Dawley Rats in Response to Renal Ischemia Reperfusion

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Renal ischemia reperfusion injury (I/R) has great clinical relevance and many treatments and hospitalizations are associated with this pathological process. Animal models are widely used in the development of kidney I/R studies and numerous papers have been published in this field in recent years suggesting that the nature of the animal species used in these models can lead to a different response to ischemic insult. The Brown Norway (BN) rat strain is known to show endogenous resistance to the ischemic process and several studies have sought to identify the cell mechanism present in this resistance. Despite of all the previously reported works, little is know about the genetic response of BN in front of ischemic insult. By means of a microarray comparative genetic study between BN and the ischemia susceptible rat strain Sprague Dawley (SD), the present work determine the genetic response to the I/R process in both rat strains and the genes that are differentially expressed during the I/R process and link them with some of the main cytoprotective processes responsible for the endogenous resistance to renal ischemic injury in BN rats. Keywords: comparative genomics hybridization

DESIGN
The following experimental groups for BN and SD rats  (n=3 per group) were studied: Group 1: Control (C): Animals subjected to identical maneuvers as the I/R group except that the renal pedicles were not clamped. Group 2: Ischemia/Reperfusion (I/R): Animals were subjected to 45 min of bilateral ischemia and 24 h of reperfusion. Gene expression profiles were obtained from control and I/R groups in the two rat strains in three biological replicates, resulting in 12 hybridizations from 2 groups × 2 strains × 3biological replicates. To evaluate the technical reliability of microarrays, replicate microarrays were performed on several RNA samples. In total, 12 hybridizations were performed for this study.

PLATFORM
GPL2996 ABI Rat Genome Survey Microarray

CITATIONS
20392802

