TITLE
Function of human CD141+ DC and CD1c+ DC in a humanized mouse model in vivo

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Human immune cell subsets develop in immunodeficient mice following reconstitution with human CD34+ haematopoietic stem cells. These “humanized” mice are useful models to study human immunology and human-tropic infections, autoimmunity and cancer. However, some human immune cell subsets are unable to fully develop or acquire full functional capacity due to a lack of cross-reactivity of many growth factors and cytokines between species. “Classical” (c) DC arise from a separate precursor to monocytes and initiate and direct T cell responses. In mice they can be further categorized into cDC1, which mediate Th1 and CD8+ T cell responses, and cDC2, which mediate Th2 and Th17 responses. The gene expression profiles and phenotype human CD141+ DC and CD1c+ DC subsets align with mouse cDC1 and cDC2 respectively but there are also key interspecies differences. Human CD141+ DC and CD1c+ DC develop in humanized mice but the extent to which they resemble their human blood counterparts is not yet known. We therefore analyzed the gene expression profiles of CD141+ DC and CD1c+ DC in humanized mice and demonstrated that they closely resemble those in human blood, making this an attractive model in which to study human DC in vitro or on vivo. We further used this model to explore changes in DC subsets after activation with TLR3 and TLR7/8 ligands, poly I:C and R848 in vivo. A core panel of genes consistent with DC maturation status were upregulated by both subsets. R848 specifically upregulated genes associated with Th17 responses by CD1c+ DC, whilst poly I:C upregulated IFN-λ genes specifically by CD141+ DC. Thus CD141+ DC and CD1c+ DC share a similar activation profiles in vivo but also have induce unique signatures that support specialized roles in CD8+ T cell priming and Th17 responses respectively.  '

DESIGN
Gene expression analysis CD1c+ and CD141+ dendritic cells isolated by FACs from humanized mice bone marrow. Response to PolyI:C, R848, and a combination was studied by treatment of the donor mouse 2 hours prior to cell isolation.

PLATFORM
GPL10558 Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 expression beadchip

CITATIONS
28878767

