TITLE
Mosquito-borne diseases and Omics: Tissue-restricted expression and alternative splicing revealed by transcriptome profiling of Anopheles stephensi

ORGANISM
Anopheles stephensi

SUMMARY
Malaria is as one of the most debilitating mosquito-borne global health burdens. While much of the malaria and mosquito-borne disease attention have focused on Africa, South East Asia accounts for a sizable portion of the malaria global burden. Moreover, about 50% of the Asian malaria incidence and deaths have been from India. The completion of genome sequence of Anopheles stephensi, a major malaria vector in Asia, offers new opportunities for global health innovation, not to mention for progress in deciphering the vectorial ability of this mosquito species at a molecular level. Moving forward, tissue-based expression profiling would be the next obvious step in understanding gene functions of Anopheles stephensi. We report here the first study, to the best of our knowledge, on transcriptomic profile of four important organs of an adult female Anopheles stephensi mosquito (midgut, Malpighian tubules, fat body and ovary). In all, we identified over 21,000 transcripts corresponding to more than 12,000 gene loci from these four tissues. This study provides the tissue-based expression profiles of majority of annotated transcripts in Anopheles stephensi genome, and the dynamics of alternative splicing in these tissues. Understanding the transcript expression and gene function at the tissue level would immensely help in enhancing our knowledge of this important vector and decipher the putative role of these tissues. This knowledge might in turn provide the basis of selection of candidates for future studies on vectorial ability and novel molecular targets to intercept malaria transmission.

DESIGN
Transcriptome analysis of four An.stephensi tissues from female adult mosquitoes indexed and analyzed as technical replicates on two lanes of Illumina HiScanSQ. Reference - PRJNA253267

PLATFORM
GPL23543 Illumina HiScanSQ (Anopheles stephensi)

CITATIONS
28708456

