TITLE
RNA sequencing to determine the contribution of kinase receptor transactivation to G protein coupled receptor signalling in vascular smooth muscle cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
G protein coupled receptor (GPCR) signalling covers three major mechanisms. GPCR agonist engagement allows for the G proteins to bind to the receptor leading to a classical downstream signalling cascade. The second mechanism is via the utilization of the β-arrestin signalling molecule and thirdly via transactivation dependent signalling. GPCRs can transactivate protein tyrosine kinase receptors (PTKR) to activate respective downstream signalling intermediates. In the past decade GPCR transactivation dependent signalling was expanded to show transactivation of serine/threonine kinase receptors (S/TKR). Kinase receptor transactivation enormously broadens the GPCR signalling paradigm. This work utilizes next generation RNA-sequencing to study the contribution of transactivation dependent signalling to total protease activated receptor (PAR)-1 signalling. Transactivation, assessed as gene expression, accounted for 50 percent of the total genes regulated by thrombin acting through PAR-1 in human coronary artery smooth muscle cells. GPCR transactivation of PTKRs is approximately equally important as the transactivation of the S/TKR with 209 and 177 genes regulated respectively, via either signalling pathway. This work shows that genome wide studies can provide powerful insights into GPCR mediated signalling pathways

DESIGN
Human CASMCS cells were subject to various treatments: basal, thrombin, thrombin + SB, thrombin + AG and thrombin + SB + AG. Gene expression was studies after 30 minutes to assess genes that are differentially expressed by treat emnt with agonists and antagonists. The agonoists and antagonists are associated with transactivation of GPCRs and the gene expression results will help identify relevant genes.

PLATFORM
GPL17303 Ion Torrent Proton (Homo sapiens)

CITATIONS
28719611

