TITLE
Gene expression profiling in Ciona TVCs with FGF-MAPK perturbation [bulk RNA-seq]

ORGANISM
Ciona robusta

SUMMARY
Dynamic gene expression programs determine multipotent cell states and fate choices during development. Multipotent progenitors for cardiomyocytes and branchiomeric head muscles populate the pharyngeal mesoderm of vertebrate embryos, but the mechanisms underlying cardiopharyngeal multipotency and heart vs. head muscle fate choices remain elusive. The tunicate Ciona emerged as a simple chordate model to study cardiopharyngeal development with unprecedented spatio-temporal resolution. We analyzed the transcriptome of single cardiopharyngeal lineage cells isolated at successive time points encompassing the transitions from multipotent progenitors to distinct first and second heart, and pharyngeal muscle precursors. We reconstructed the three cardiopharyngeal developmental trajectories, and characterized gene expression dynamics and regulatory states underlying each fate choice. Experimental perturbations and bulk transcriptome analyses revealed that ongoing FGF/MAPK signaling maintains cardiopharyngeal multipotency and promotes the pharyngeal muscle fate, whereas signal termination permits the deployment of a full pan-cardiac program and heart fate specification. We identified the Dach1/2 homolog as a novel evolutionarily conserved second-heart-field-specific factor and demonstrate, through lineage tracing and CRISPR/Cas9 perturbations,  that it operates downstream of Tbx1/10 to actively suppress the first heart lineage program. This data indicates that the regulatory state of multipotent cardiopharyngeal progenitors determines the first vs. second heart lineage choice, and that Tbx1/10 acts as a bona fide regulator of cardiopharyngeal multi potency. We performed bulk RNAseq to profile the FACS purified Ciona Robusta Truck Ventral Cells (TVCs) with FGF-MAPK perturbation conditions to address the question- What is the role of FGF signaling pathway during early cardiopharyngeal specification.  we performed bulk RNA sequencing of FACS-purified cardiopharyngeal lineage cells isolated from embryos and larvae expressing either a dominant negative form the fibroblast growth factor receptor (dnFGFR), or a constitutively active form of M-Ras (caM-Ras), the sole Ras homolog in Ciona, under the control of TVC-specific enhancers.

DESIGN
Examination of 2 different FGF-MAPK perturbation conditions in TVCs from 4 time points.

PLATFORM
GPL23563 Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Ciona robusta)

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

