TITLE
The biological age linked with oxidative estress modifies breast cancer aggressiveness

ORGANISM
Mus

SUMMARY
The incidence of breast cancer increases with age until menopause, and breast cancer is more aggressive in younger women. The existence of epidemiological links between breast cancer and aging indicates that both processes possibly share some common mechanisms of development. Oxidative stress is associated with both cancer susceptibility and aging. Here we observed that ERBB2-positive breast cancer, developed from genetically different ERBB2-positive transgenic mice generated by a backcross, is more aggressive in younger than in older mice, similar to what occurs in humans. In this cohort, we estimated the oxidative biological age using a mathematical model that integrated several subphenotypes directly or indirectly related to oxidative stress. This model included the serum levels of HDL-cholesterol and magnesium that were determined at a disease-free stage, and total AKT1 and glutathione concentrations in the liver at the time of necropsy. Later we defined the grade of aging due to oxidative stress as the increment of aging, which was the difference between the predicted biological age and the chronological age. This comparison permitted the identification of the biologically younger mice with less oxidative stress and older mice with more oxidative stress than would be expected according to their chronological age. Interestingly, biologically older mice developed more aggressive breast cancer than the biologically younger mice. We identified genomic regions on chromosomes 2 and 15 that were linked to the grade of oxidative aging. The levels of expression of Zbp1 located on chromosome 2, a gene related to necroptosis and inflammation, positively correlated with the grade of oxidative aging and tumour aggressiveness. This study shows part of the complex interactions between breast cancer and aging.

DESIGN
We have studied differential gene expression from livers in mice with different susceptibility with breast cancer. We evaluated 50 livers from mice with extreme values of grade of aging determined by a multivariate model.

PLATFORM
GPL16570 [MoGene-2_0-st] Affymetrix Mouse Gene 2.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]

CITATIONS
Has this study been published? Please login to update or notify GEO .

