TITLE
Molecular signature of CD34+ hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells in chronic phase CML

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML) is a malignant disorder of the hematopoietic stem cell, which is characterized by the reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22 (t(9;22)(q34;q11)) The translocation results in the formation of the BCR-ABL fusion oncogene encoding a protein with constitutive activated tyrosine kinase activity which plays a central role in the pathogenesis of the disease. There are still several open questions with respect to BCR-ABL-induced malignant transformation. A large limitation of the existing data about BCR-ABL effects is that they are derived to a great proportion from human hematopoietic cell lines, BCR-ABL-transformed murine cell lines or fibroblasts and mouse models, which might not be representative for chronic phase CML. A suitable cell population for studies on CML biology are primary hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells from patients with CML. Therefore, we provide in this study a genome-wide expression signature of highly enriched CD34+ cells from bone marrow (BM) of untreated patients with CML in chronic phase. Gene expression profiles of immunomagnetically enriched BM CML CD34+ cells (n=9) were compared with those of normal BM CD34+ cells (n=8) using microarrays covering 8.746 genes. Total RNA was extracted, reversely transcribed, in vitro transcribed and labelled and hybridized to Affymetrix HG Focus Arrays. Following quality control and normalization differentially expressed genes were identified by significance analysis of microarrays (SAM). Comparing both groups 918 genes were significantly differentially expressed (q value < 0.1%; fold change > 1.3). Several of the BCR-ABL-induced effects described in cell lines and BCR-ABL-transduced cells could also be found in primary CML progenitor cells as for example the transcriptional activation of the classical MAPK pathway and the PI3 kinase/AKT pathway and the down-regulation of the pro-apoptotic gene IRF8. Moreover, novel transcriptional changes in comparison with normal CD34+ cells were identified. These include an up-regulation of components of the TGFb signalling pathway and the non-canonical Wnt/Ca2+ pathway, a transcriptional activation of fetal haemoglobin genes and genes associated with early hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) such as HoxA9 and MEIS1 and up-regulation of genes involved in fatty acid metabolism, of the thrombin receptor PAR1 and the neuroepithelial cell transforming gene 1. Differential expression of differentiation-associated genes suggested an alteration of the composition of the CD34+ cell population in CML. This was confirmed by immunophenotypical subset analyses of chronic phase CML CD34+ cells showing an increase of erythroid progenitors and a decrease of granulocyte-macrophage progenitor cells while the proportion of HSC was similar in normal and CML CD34+ cells. In conclusion, our results give novel insights into the biology of CML hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells and could be the basis for identification of new targets for therapy. Keywords: ordered

