TITLE
Acetone stress response in Desulfovibrio vulgaris

ORGANISM
Desulfovibrio vulgaris str. Hildenborough

SUMMARY
Desulfovibrio vulgaris has been studied extensively for its potential in the bioremediation of heavy metals and radionuclides. Hydrocarbons and solvents, as frequent environmental co-contaminants, have been reported to inhibit microbial activities and thereby pose a limitation on bioremediation efficiency. As a part of the Genomes: GTL project to deduce the stress response pathways in metal/radionuclide reducing bacteria, we studied the responses of D. vulgaris to acetone, which is a ketone solvent frequently observed at contaminated DOE sites. Growth experiments in closed vessels at 37 °C indicated that D. vulgaris could maintain normal growth with 3%(v/v) acetone following a 1-h lag phase. When the acetone concentration was raised to 5%(v/v), we observed a 2-h lag phase followed by a growth rate which was only 15% that of normal. At an acetone concentration of 8%(v/v), no active growth was observed following 10 hours of incubation. To assess the mechanism of acetone inhibition, genome-wide transcriptional profiles were analyzed from D. vulgaris cultures following acetone (5% v/v) treatment using whole-genome microarrays. This acetone shock altered the expression of a large number of genes in the D. vulgaris genome, of which 309 were up-regulated greater than 2 fold and 199 were down-regulated by over 2 fold. Transcripts highly up-regulated included genes encoding the flagella structural subunits, flgB (15 fold), fliE (11 fold), and flgH (10 fold). Another group of genes highly induced were chaperones, such as dnaJ (11 fold), groES (8 fold), and hsp20 (8 fold). Down-regulated genes included two groups of genes, ribosomal proteins and amino acid transporters, suggesting a state of growth arrest upon acetone addition. These results were interpreted to mean that D. vulgaris responds to elevated solvent levels by increased motility and maintenance of proper protein functions. Current work is focused on the analysis of regulatory pathways based on temporal transcriptional dynamics. Keywords: Stress response

