TITLE
Characterisation of genetic basis of changes in stomatal numbers at elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Atmospheric CO2 concentrations can determine the number of stomata that form on plant leaves (Woodward & Kelly 1995 New Phyt 131: 311-327). The majority of species exhibit reduced stomatal densities at elevated CO2. However, not all plant species react in the same way to elevated CO2 levels and there is a spectrum of effects:  Some species increase stomatal densities, some decrease stomatal densities, and some are unaffected.  In addition to which, other environmental factors influence the number of stomata that a plant form.  Light intensity has also been shown to affect stomatal numbers in various Arabidopsis ecotypes (Schluter et al. 2003 J Exp Bot 54 (383): 867-874; Lake et al. 2002 J Exp Bot 53 (367): 183-193), by increasing stomatal numbers with increasing light levels. There are many changes in gene expression under elevated CO2 conditions, so pinpointing specific genes involved in the stomatal response to CO2 is difficult.  In addition, if there is crosstalk between the various signalling pathways affecting ultimate stomatal numbers this complicates further the task of finding genes specifically involved the stomatal response to CO2.  Therefore we propose to look at the interaction of two known influences on stomatal numbers, light and CO2, on one specific ecotype, Col-0.  We aim to test the hypothesis that light signals interact the CO2 signals that affect stomatal development.  Arabidopsis thaliana Columbia-0 ecotype has previously been shown to decrease stomatal numbers in response to a doubling of ambient CO2 concentrations.  Col-0 has also been shown to increase stomatal numbers in response to high light intensities.  Therefore we propose to grow A. thaliana Col-0 at three light intensities (50 mmol m-2 s-1, 150 mmol m-2 s-1 and 250 mmol m-2 s-1), in both ambient and elevated (double ambient) atmospheric CO2 concentrations.  By looking in more detail at how gene expression differs between plants grown at ambient and elevated CO2 at the same light intensities, and also how gene expression differs between plants grown at the same CO2 concentration but different light intensities, we aim to identify those genes involved in the stomatal developmental response to CO2 and whether genes involved in the light response can also be isolated. Experimenter name = Susannah Bird Experimenter phone = (0114) 222 4649 Experimenter address = Animal and Plant Science Department Experimenter address = Alfred Denny Building Experimenter address = Western Bank Experimenter address = Sheffield Experimenter zip/postal_code = S10 2TN Experimenter country = UK Keywords: growth_condition_design

