TITLE
Global mRNA expression analysis in myo1 delta strains of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
The Saccharomyces cerevisiae MYO1 gene encodes the myosin type II heavy chain (Myo1p), a protein required for normal cytokinesis in budding yeast. Deletion of the MYO1 gene prevents actomyosin-driven cytokinesis thereby activating an alternative mechanism that involves the synthesis of a remedial septum. Myo1p deficiency in yeast (myo1) also causes the formation of attached cells, abnormal budding patterns, formation of enlarged and elongated cells, increased osmotic sensitivity, delocalized chitin deposition, and increased chitin synthesis.  To determine how the differential expression of genes is related to these diverse phenotypes, we analyzed the global mRNA expression profile of myo1 strains. Global mRNA expression profiles of myo1 strains and their corresponding wild type controls were obtained by hybridization to yeast oligonucleotide microarrays. Results for selected genes were confirmed by real time RT-PCR. A total of 547 differentially expressed genes  were identified with 263 up-regulated and 284 down regulated genes in the myo1 strains.  Gene set enrichment analysis revealed the significant over-representation of genes in the protein biosynthesis and stress response categories. Genes involved in cell wall assembly (GAS1, PSA1, CIS3, FIT1, WSC2), MAP kinase activity (SLT2), Rho1p Guanine Exchange Factor (ROM1), and regulation of cell proliferation (RAS1) were also differentially expressed in myo1 strains. Conclusions: We have presented a global mRNA expression analysis of yeast myo1 strains and hypothesized about possible correlations with morphological and biochemical phenotypes observed in these strains. We report 547 differentially regulated genes in the myo1 mutant strains. Genes involved in the control of cell proliferation, protein synthesis and maturation, DNA replication, and cell division processes were largely down regulated, suggesting a mechanism for delayed cell cycle progression and growth that involves coordinated regulation of these processes in myo1 strains. Other genes involved in the cellular response to cell wall stress and cell wall organization were largely up-regulated suggesting that cell wall biogenesis is important for the completion of cytokinesis and cell wall morphogenetic processes that may also be affected by myosin II deficiency. Gene set enrichment analysis indicates that stress response and protein biosynthesis gene categories are inversely correlated in this mutant. Keywords: Comparative genomic hybridization

