TITLE
Impact of Cirrhosis on Endogenous Interferons During HCV Treatment with Direct Acting Antivirals

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is now routinely treated with interferon (IFN)-free regimens composed of directly acting antiviral (DAA) agents.  Changes in hepatic and peripheral innate and adaptive immune function during DAA therapy associate with achieving a sustained virologic response (SVR). The present study explored the impact of cirrhosis on host endogenous interferon pathways during DAA therapy. mRNA and micro-RNA (miRNA) expression profiling was performed on paired pre- and end-of-treatment (EOT) liver biopsies from subjects treated with a 2 DAA regimen (sofosbuvir/ledipasvir [SOF/LDV]) for 12 weeks (n=4, 3 with cirrhosis) or a 3 DAA regimen (SOF/LDV with GS-9669 or GS-9451) for 6 weeks (n=6, 0 with cirrhosis). Nine of ten subjects achieved SVR, with one relapse in the GS-9669 treatment arm (ISHAK fibrosis 4). Hepatic interferon-stimulated gene expression was down-regulated in the liver of all subjects, with no observable impact of cirrhosis or duration of treatment. Hepatic down-regulation of all type-III IFNs was observed (IFNL1, IFNL2, IFNL3, IFNL4-ΔG), while IFNA2 expression, undetectable in all subjects pre-treatment, was detected in 3 of 9 subjects at EOT (all 3 achieved SVR).  Only the subject who relapsed had detectable IFNL4-ΔG expression in EOT liver.  No change in IFNB1, IFNG, or IFNA5 expression was observed, and expression of other type-I IFNs (IFNA1, IFNA4, IFNA5, IFNA6, IFNA8, IFNA16, IFNA17) was not detected pre- or post-treatment.  While expression of multiple miRNAs changed in liver tissue over the course of treatment, most miRNAs previously associated with HCV replication, innate interferon signaling, and hepatic fibrosis did not change significantly.  Conclusions: Changes in the host IFN-response during DAA therapy associate with favorable treatment outcome regardless of composition and duration of therapy or extent of hepatic fibrosis.

DESIGN
Paired liver biopsy of pretreatment (PRE) versus end of treatment (EOT)

