TITLE
The gene expression profile of non-cultured, highly purified human adipose tissue pericytes: transcriptomic evidence that pericytes are stem cells in human adipose tissue

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Pericytes (PCs) are a subset of perivascular cells that can give rise to mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) when culture-expanded, and are postulated to give rise to MSC-like cells during tissue repair in vivo. PCs have been suggested to behave as stem cells (SCs) in situ in animal models, although evidence for this role in humans is lacking. Here, we analyzed the transcriptomes of highly purified, non-cultured adipose tissue (AT)-derived PCs (ATPCs) to detect gene expression changes that occur as they acquire MSC characteristics in vitro, and evaluated the hypothesis that human ATPCs exhibit a gene expression profile compatible with an AT SC phenotype. The results showed ATPCs are non-proliferative and express genes characteristic not only of PCs (e.g., PDGFRB, NGFR, CSPG4, ACTA2, ALPL, NESTIN, LEPR, CXCL12, SEPT4, and GLI1), but also of AT stem/progenitor cells previously described in mice (BHLHE22, ZNF423, CYP7B1, FABP4, PPARG, and CD34). Additional analyses defined a gene expression signature for AT PCs, and revealed putative novel AT PC markers (e.g., APOD, ARC, SPARCL1, OMD, IGF1, EDNRB, and TNMD). Various transcripts, including NGFR, LEPR, and almost all AT stem/progenitor cell genes differentially expressed by ATPCs were not expressed by ATMSCs or culture-expanded PCs. Genes expressed by ATMSCs but not by ATPCs (e.g., CDH2, SSTR1, and FGF1) were also identified. These findings strengthen the hypothesis that PCs are SCs in vascularized tissues, highlight gene expression changes they undergo as they assume an MSC phenotype, and provide new insights into PC biology.

DESIGN
Highly purified human adipose-tissue pericytes (AT3G5Cs) were isolated based on the expression of the antigen detected by the 3G5 antibody, lack of expression of CD31, and ability to adhere to tissue-cultured plastic whithin a short time.  Gene expression profiles of freshly isolated AT3G5Cs (n = 2 different biological samples) were compared to published expression profiles of other cell types, including adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells, in order to further dissect the hypothesis that pericytes give rise to cultured mesenchymal stromal cells, determine characteristics of the pericytic gene expression profile, and find an adipose tissue pericyte gene expression signature.

