TITLE
Genome-wide analysis reveals conserved transcriptional responses downstream of resting potential change in Xenopus embryos, axolotl regeneration, and human mesenchymal cell differentiation [axolotl data]

ORGANISM
Ambystoma mexicanum

SUMMARY
Endogenous bioelectric signaling via changes in cellular resting potential (Vmem) is a key regulator of patterning during regeneration and embryogenesis in numerous model systems. Depolarization of Vmem has been functionally implicated in de-differentiation, tumorigenesis, anatomical re-specification, and appendage regeneration.  However, no unbiased analyses have been performed to understand genome-wide transcriptional responses to Vmem change in vivo. Moreover, it is unknown which genes or gene networks represent conserved targets of bioelectrical signaling across different patterning contexts and species. Here, we use microarray analysis to comparatively analyze transcriptional responses to specific Vmem depolarization. We compare the response of the transcriptome during embryogenesis (Xenopus development), regeneration (Axolotl regeneration), and stem cell differentiation (human mesenchymal stem cells in culture) to identify common networks across model species that are associated with depolarization. Both  sub-network enrichment and PANTHER analyses identified a number of key genetic modules as targets of Vmem change, and also revealed important (well-conserved) commonalities in bioelectric signal transduction, despite highly diverse experimental contexts and species. Depolarization regulates specific transcriptional networks across all three germ layers (ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm) such as cell differentiation and apoptosis, and this information will be used for developing mechanistic models of bioelectric regulation of patterning. Moreover, our analysis reveals that Vmem change regulates transcripts related to important disease pathways such as cancer and neurodegeneration, which may represent novel targets for emerging electroceutical therapies.

DESIGN
All axolotls used in these experiments were bred in the axolotl facility at the University of Minnesota under the IACUC protocol #1201A08381. Axolotls of 2–3 cm were used for all in vivo experiments, and animals were kept in separate containers and fed daily with artemia; water was changed daily. Animals were anesthetized in 0.01% p-amino benzocaine (Sigma) before microinjection was performed.  There were 9 microarrays conducted, and these were ivermectin-treated  (n=3). Experimental Design: Ivermectin injection Ivermectin or vehicle only (water) was pressure injected into the central canal of the spinal cord, and this was visualized by the addition of Fast Green into the solution. Directly after injection, a portion of the spinal cord was surgically removed and the animals were placed back into water in individual containers. One day post injury (1dpi) animals were anesthetized again and the area of the injury was removed. Tissue from 10 animals were pooled for each microarray replicate. Mature - Uninjured spinal cord tissue Sc Crush- spinal cord tissue 1 day after injury Ivermectin - Ivermectin injected spinal cord tissue 1 day after injury.

