TITLE
Insights into function and regulation of microRNAs by decoding degradation dynamics [4SU]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The regulation of the miRNA pool is one of the critical events in the definition of cell identity and behavior both in steady-state condition as well during cell transitions. While mechanisms controlling biogenesis have received much attention, little is known about how miRNA are turned over, due to the lack of proper approaches to analyze miRNA decay without globally perturbing gene transcription or miRNA biogenesis. To overcome such limitations we developed a “pulse-chase” approach for the analysis of miRNA degradation dynamics at genome-wide scale in unperturbed mammalian cells. MiRNA half-lives appeared heterogeneous: while many species were very stable (T1/2 > 24h, ‘slow’ miRNAs), some others are quickly turned over (T1/2 =4-14h ‘fast’ miRNAs). ‘Fast’ species comprises passenger miRNAs, as expected, and a consistent number (25/129) of guide miRNAs. These miRNAs are associated to high Target:miRNA stoichiometric ratios, particularly evident considering targets with extensive complementarity, and are enriched for 3’-end modifications (tailing and trimming), implying that target abundance and enzymatic activities are in place and mediates miRNA degradation. By integrating decay rates with biosynthetic parameters, we could model the abundance and regulation of miRNAs as a function of transcription and degradation rates and highlight how different decays could affect the magnitude and the kinetics of miRNA regulation. These findings were recapitulated in a specific biological process, namely the regulation of miRNAs by serum stimulation of quiescent fibroblast, pointing out how multiple regulatory mechanisms (synthesis, decay, target abundance and miRNA modification) concomitantly control miRNA functions.

DESIGN
To obtain a global picture of miRNA decays, we performed high-throughput sequencing analysis (Illumina) of labeled miRNAs along the “pulse and chase” experiment. A total of 21 libraries were produced, using 4SU RNA isolated from 7 time points and 3 independent biological replicas. We additionally sequenced i) total RNA from growing cells (not labeled without extraction – UNT), ii) total RNA pulsed with 4SU (labeled without extraction – 4SU); and iii) 4SU RNA from non-labeled cells (not labeled with extraction, negative control – NEG).

