TITLE
Development of Progressive Aortic Vasculopathy in a Rat Model of Aging

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
This study utilized a standard rat model of aging and global gene expression analyses to attempt to identify the most appropriate time points to study vascular aging and to identify molecules associated with the development of pathology. Recent studies have established that age is the major risk factor for vascular disease.  Numerous changes occur in vascular structure and function during aging, and animal models, including rodents, are the primary means to determine the underlying mechanisms of age-mediated vascular pathology.  This study utilized a standard rat model of aging and both morphometric and global gene expression analyses to attempt to identify the most appropriate time points to study vascular aging and to identify molecules associated with the development of pathology.  Morphometric analysis of Fischer 344/Brown Norway F1 hybrid (F344xBN) rat thoracic aorta indicated, in contrast to some previous studies, that progressive increases in intimal and medial thickness, as well as smooth muscle cell-containing intimal protrusions, occurred with age.  This structural vascular pathology was associated with a progressive increase in global differential gene expression.  Specific molecules with altered mRNA and protein expression included the adhesion molecules ICAM-1 and VCAM-1, and the bone morphogenic proteins osteopontin and bone sialoprotein-1.  Intimal-associated macrophages were detected with immunohistochemistry in paraffin sections of thoracic aorta and were found to increase significantly in number with age.  Both systemic and tissue markers of oxidant stress, serum 8-isoprostane and 3-nitrotyrosine, respectively, were found to increase during aging.  The results demonstrate that increased inflammation and oxidant stress occur progressively during vascular aging, and suggest therapeutic targets to limit or reverse aging-associated vascular pathology and dysfunction. Keywords: time course

