TITLE
Derivation and Evaluation of Putative Adverse Outcome Pathways for the Effects of Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors on Reproductive Processes in Fish

ORGANISM
Pimephales promelas

SUMMARY
Cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibition is of concern in fish because COX inhibitors (e.g., ibuprofen) are ubiquitous in aquatic systems/fish tissues, and can disrupt synthesis of prostaglandins that modulate a variety of essential biological functions including reproduction. Transcriptomic data and publicly available high throughput toxicity data were utilized to develop putative adverse outcome pathways (AOPs) for molecular initiating event (MIE) of COX inhibition. Effects of a waterborne exposure to indomethacin (IN; 100 µg/L), ibuprofen (IB; 200 µg/L) and celecoxib (CX; 20 µg/L) on liver metabolome and ovarian gene expression (using oligonucleotide microarrays) in sexually mature fathead minnows were examined. Metabolomic profiles of IN, IB and CX were not significantly different from control or one another. Exposure to IB and CX resulted in differential expression of comparable numbers of genes (IB = 433, CX= 545). In contrast, 2558 genes were differentially expressed in IN-treated fish. Functional analyses (canonical pathway and gene set enrichment) indicated extensive effects of IN on prostaglandin synthesis pathway, oocyte meiosis and several other processes consistent with physiological roles of prostaglandins. Transcriptomic data was congruent with apical endpoint data - IN reduced plasma prostaglandin F2 alpha concentrations, and ovarian COX activity, whereas IB and CX did not. Putative AOPs pathways for COX inhibition (MIE) leading to reproductive failure (adverse outcome) via reduction of: 1) ovulation, 2) reproductive behaviors mediated by exogenous and endogenous prostaglandins, and 3) oocyte maturation were developed.

DESIGN
Adult fathead minnow were exposed to either 100 µg/L indomethacin, 200 µg/L ibuprofen, 20 µg/L celecoxib or UV-treated Lake Superior (control) water for 96 hours.  After exposure, microarray analyses were conducted using the female gonads (n=7-8 per treatment) and metabolomic analyses were conducted using the livers of all the exposed fish.

