TITLE
High-resolution genomic profiling of disseminated tumor cells in prostate cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Circulating (CTCs) and disseminated (DTCs) tumor cells are of great interest to the field of cancer research as they provide a minimally-invasive window for assessing aspects of cancer biology including tumor heterogeneity, a means to discover biomarkers of disease behavior, and a way to identify and prioritize therapeutic targets in the emerging era of precision oncology.  However, the rarity of CTC/DTC poses a significant challenge to the consistent success in analyzing the molecular features of these cells including genomic aberrations.  Herein, we demonstrate our optimized and robust methods to reproducibly detect genomic copy number alterations in samples of 2-40 cells after whole-genome amplification using a high resolution SNP-array platform and refined computational algorithms.  We have determined the limit of detection for heterogeneity within a sample as 50% and also demonstrated success in analyzing single cells.  We validated the genes in genomic regions that are frequently amplified or deleted by qPCR and nCounter copy number quantification.  We further applied these methods to DTCs isolated from individuals with advanced prostate cancer to confirm the highly aberrant nature of these cells.  We compared copy number alterations of DTCs to matched metastatic tumors isolated from the same individual to gain biological insight.  These developments provide high-resolution genomic profiling of single and rare cell populations, and should be applicable to a wide-range of sample sources.

DESIGN
Disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) were isolated from bone marrow aspirates of patients with advanced stages of prostate cancer (Adv-DTC), including men with androgen-dependent metastases and others with metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Genomic profiling on 8 representative Adv-DTCs from 8 different patients were performed using Ilumina Human CytoSNP-12 bead array.

