TITLE
Seeking genes responsible for developmental origins of health and disease (DOHaD) from the fetal mouse brain following maternal food deprivation (FD) and food restriction (FR) using OMICS approach

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
A non-optimal fetal environment is known to cause low birth weight, which has been epidemiologically associated with a greater risk of adult diseases. Maternal undernutrition in animal models has also revealed the increased risks for adult diseases in the offspring. In this study, pregnant mice underwent overnight food deprivation at gestation day (GD)17 or 50% food restriction (FR) from GD10 to GD17, and the fetal brains were examined for global changes in gene expression by DNA microarray analysis utilizing the dye-swap approach. We present here a list of candidate genes from the fetal brain that might be responsible for developmental origins of health and disease.

DESIGN
For food deprivation (FD), the pregnant mice were deprived of the food for overnight before lights were turned off on GD17. For food restriction (FR), pregnant mice were exposed to 50% food restriction (FR) from GD 10 to 17 and caesarean section was performed between 10:00-12:00 AM on GD18. Amount of CE-2 chow supplied to FR group was calculated as 50% of CE-2 consumed by control group each gestation day. Control group was supplied with chow ad libitum. Pregnant mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation, and the fetuses were taken out and anesthetized on ice cold phosphate-buffered saline. The fetuses were dissected under a dissection microscope, and fetal tissues are carefully removed avoiding any other tissues contamination. The brain was collected from control (n=5) and FD (n=5) or FR (n=5) fetuses, and immediately frozen by immersion in liquid nitrogen. For DNA microarray analyses, the total RNA was extracted, quality and quantity determined, and total RNA from each sample (control and treatment) in each group was pooled, followed by established protocols for genome wide expression changes for both FD and FR samples using a 60-mer probes (4 x 44K (41,090 gene probes), mouse whole genome, Agilent) DNA chip by the dye-swap approach.

