TITLE
s-SHIP expression identifies a subset of murine basal prostate cells as neonatal stem cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Isolation of prostate stem cells is crucial for understanding their biology during normal development and tumorigenesis. In this aim, we used a transgenic mouse model expressing GFP from the stem cell-specific s-SHIP promoter to mark putative stem cells during postnatal prostate development. We showed that cells identified by s-SHIP/GFP expression are present transiently during early prostate development and localize to the basal cell layer of the epithelium. These prostate s-SHIP/GFP-positive cells represent a subpopulation of the lineage-negative / CD24-positive / Sca-1-positive / CD49f-positive (LSC) cells and are capable of self–renewal together with enhanced growth potential in sphere–forming assay in vitro, a phenotype consistent with that of a prostate stem cell population. Transplantation assays of these prostate GFP-positive cells demonstrate reconstitution of prostate ducts containing both basal and luminal cells in renal grafts. Altogether, these results demonstrate that s-SHIP promoter expression is a new marker for neonatal basal prostate cells exhibiting stem cell properties that enables prostate stem cells in situ identification and isolation via a single consistent parameter. Since the GFP-positive cell population is a small subset of basal LSC cells and is most responsible for stem-like activity, we performed transcriptional profiling of GFP-negative LSC and GFP-positive LSC cells to distinguish a basal cell profile from a tissue stem cell profile.

DESIGN
Prostate tissue was collected from 6-day-old male mice, minced into small fragment, digested with 200 U/ml collagenase IA–S (Sigma; C5894) in Dulbecco’s modified Eagles medium (DME, Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Hyclone) (DME-10% FBS) at 37°C for 60 min with gentle agitation. The digested cells were filtered through a 40-μm cell strainer (BD Biosciences) washed, and resuspended in DME-10% FBS., filtered and labeled with antibodies against lineage (Ter119, CD31, CD45), CD49f and Sca-1 cell surface markers (Affymetrix ebiosciences). Labeled cells were analyzed and the GFP-negative LSC and GFP-positive-LSC populations were sorted by FACS. For each cell population, 3 independent samples were collected and analysed.

