TITLE
Molecular aspects of the role of root hairs during water stress in barley

ORGANISM
Hordeum vulgare

SUMMARY
The important parts of the root system are root hairs, which play a role in mineral and water uptake. Here, we present an analysis of the transcriptomic response to water deficiency of the wild-type (WT) barley cultivar ‘Karat’ and its root hairless mutant rhl1.a. A comparison of the transcriptional changes induced by water stress resulted in the identification of genes whose expression was specifically affected in each genotype. At the onset of water stress, more genes were modulated by water shortage in the roots of the WT plants than in the roots of the rhl1.a. The roots of the WT plants, but not of the rhl1.a, specifically responded with the induction of genes that are related to the ABA biosynthesis, stomata closure and cell wall biogenesis, thus indicating the specific activation of processes that are related to water stress signalling and protection. On the other hand, the processes of further response to abiotic stimuli, including hydrogen peroxide, heat and high light intensity, were specifically up-regulated in the leaves of the rhl1.a. An extended period of severe stress caused more drastic transcriptome changes in the roots and leaves of the rhl1.a mutant than in those of the WT. These results are in agreement with the much stronger damage to photosystem II in the rhl1.a mutant than in its parent cultivar after ten days of water stress. Taking into account the putative stress sensing and signalling features of the root hair transcriptome, we discuss the role of root hairs as sensors of environmental conditions.

DESIGN
Water-deficiency conditions related gene expression analysis was performed in barley in two genotypes: the wild-type (WT) barley cultivar ‘Karat’ and its root hairless mutant rhl1.a; in three time points: (1) control conditions, (2) onset of water stress and (3) after 10 days of severe water stress; in two organs: roots and leaves no. 2; analyses were performed in three biological replicates. Moreover an analysis of the root hair formation transcriptome was performed in the 1 cm-long root tip fragments of the wild-type (WT) barley cultivar ‘Karat’ and its root hairless mutant rhl1.a grown in aeroponic conditions; analyses were performed in four biological replicates; for each biological replicate root tip fragments from three plants were pooled together.

