TITLE
Modulation of splicing catalysis for therapeutic targeting of leukemia with mutations in genes encoding spliceosomal proteins

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Mutations in genes encoding splicing factors (which we refer to as spliceosomal genes) are commonly found in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). These mutations recurrently affect specific amino acid residues, leading to perturbed normal splice site and exon recognition. Spliceosomal gene mutations are always heterozygous and rarely occur together with one another, suggesting that cells may tolerate only a partial deviation from normal splicing activity. To test this hypothesis, we engineered mice to express a mutated allele of serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 2 (Srsf2P95H) - which commonly occurs in individuals with MDS and AML - in an inducible, hemizygous manner in hematopoietic cells. These mice rapidly succumbed to fatal bone marrow failure, demonstrating that Srsf2-mutated cells depend on the wild-type Srsf2 allele for survival. In the context of leukemia, treatment with the spliceosome inhibitor E7107 resulted in substantial reductions in leukemic burden, specifically in isogenic mouse leukemias and patient-derived xenograft AMLs carrying spliceosomal mutations. Whereas E7107 treatment of mice resulted in widespread intron retention and cassette exon-skipping in leukemic cells regardless of Srsf2 genotype, the magnitude of splicing inhibition following E7107 treatment was greater in Srsf2-mutated than in Srsf2-wild-type leukemia, consistent with the differential effect of E7107 on survival. Collectively, these data provide genetic and pharmacologic evidence that leukemias with spliceosomal gene mutations are preferentially susceptible to additional splicing perturbations in vivo as compared to leukemias without such mutations. Modulation of spliceosome function may thus provide a new therapeutic avenue in genetically defined subsets of individuals with MDS or AML.

DESIGN
We created an isogenic murine leukemia model by retroviral overexpression of the MLL-AF9 fusion oncogene in Vav-Cre Srsf2+/+ or Vav-Cre Srsf2P95H/+ BM cells followed by transplantation into lethally irradiated recipient mice. In order to determine the mechanistic origins of the Srsf2 mutant-selective effects of E7107, we analyzed transcriptional changes after five consecutive days of E7107 or vehicle treatment in vivo. GFP+ Cd11b+ cells were purified from the BM of recipient mice exactly three hours after the last dose of E7107 and were subjected to paired-end 2x50bp RNA-seq. For the knock-in/knock-out experiments, we generated inducible, hemizygous Srsf2P95H mice to study the effects of wildtype Srsf2 deletion with concomitant activation of the Srsf2P95H allele. Mx1-cre Srsf2fl/+ mice were crossed to Srsf2P95H/+ mice to generate Srsf2 wildtype (Mx1-cre Srsf2+/+), Srsf2 heterozygous knockout (Mx1-Cre Srsf2+/-), Srsf2 heterozygous P95H mutant (Mx1-Cre Srsf2P95H/+), and Srsf2 hemizygous P95H mutant (Mx1-Cre Srsf2P95H/-) mice, which were subjected to single-end 101bp RNA-seq.

