TITLE
Mechanisms of phenanthrene toxicity in the soil invertebrate Enchytraeus crypticus

ORGANISM
Enchytraeus crypticus

SUMMARY
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) continue to cause environmental challenges due to their release in the environment by a great variety of anthropogenic activities and their accumulation in soil ecosystems. Here we studied the toxicological effect of the model PAH phenanthrene (Phe) on the soil invertebrate model Enchytraeus crypticus at the individual, tissue and molecular level. Organisms were exposed to Phe for 2 and 21 days to the (previously estimated) EC10 and EC50 (population reproduction over 3 weeks). Gene expression profiling did not reveal a typical Phe-induced biotransfor-mation signature, as it usually does in arthropods and vertebrates. Instead, we observed only general metabolic processes to be affected after 2 days of exposure, such as translation and ATP synthesis-coupled electron transport. Histological sections of tissues of 2-day exposed animals did not show any deviations from the control situation. In contrast, prolonged exposure up to 21 days showed histopathological effects: chloragogenous cells were highly vacuolated and hypertrophic. This was corroborated by differential expression of genes related to immune response and oxidative stress at the transcriptomic level. The data exemplify the complexity and species-specific features of PAH toxicity among soil invertebrate communities, which restricts read-across and extrapolation in the context of soil ecological risk assessment.

DESIGN
The data presented in our manuscript is an exposure experiment where E. cryticus is exposed to phenanthrene EC10 and EC50 on reproduction for 2 and 21 days. A single channel, interwoven loop design was used to test animals. 4 biological replicates per condition were used containing 25 grams of soil and 5 - 7, adult old animals per replicate. The platform is a 4*180k Agilent platform containing some 86k E. crypticus probes in duplicate. However, only a subset of the probes (23k) was used for the analysis. To see which probes were used in the analysis see the raw data files control type column, only probes which are denoted with a 0 were used.

