TITLE
Gene expression profiling reveal different molecular pattern in G-protein coupled receptor protein signaling pathway between early- and late-onset preeclampsia

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Early-onset preeclampsia (EOPE) and late-onset preeclampsia (LOPE) has been regarded as two different phenotypes with heterogeneous manifestation. The underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Aim to gain insight into the pathogenesis of the two traits, we analyzed the placental gene expression profiles in preeclampsia placentas. Methods: Whole genome-wide microarray was used to describe the gene expression profiles in the placenta tissues from patients with early-(n=7; < 34 weeks), late-onset(n=8; > 36 weeks) PE and their controls who delivered preterm (n=5; < 34 weeks) or at term(n=5; > 36 weeks) Genes were selected as differentially expressed upon a fold-change≥2 and q-value < 0.05. qRT-PCR was undertaken to verify the results. Western blot was further performed to verify secreted genes at the protein level. Results: A total of 627 genes were differentially expressed in early-compared with late-onset PE. Of these, 177 genes were up-regulated and 450 genes down-regulated in early-onset PE. Go analysis showed significant alteration in several biological processes, in addition to the processes which have been found before, such as immune and inflammatory response, cell adhension, female pregnancy and blood vessel development. We also found alteration in G-protein coupled receptor protein signaling pathway, G protein-coupled receptor 124 (GPR124) (P=0.0064) and MAS-related GPR, member F (MRGPRF)(P=0.0155 ) were both down-regulated obviously in early-onset PE. Conclusion: The different gene expression profiles suggested early- and late-onset PE are separate disease entities. Moreover, G-protein coupled receptor protein signaling pathway may contribute to the mechanism underlying early- and late-onset preeclampsia.

DESIGN
Whole genome-wide microarray was used to describe the gene expression profiles in the placenta tissues from patients with early-(n=7; < 34 weeks), late-onset (n=8; > 36 weeks) PE and their controls who delivered preterm(n=5; < 34 weeks) or at term(n=5; > 36 weeks). Pooled controls who delivered at term were labled with cy5.

