TITLE
Reduced mTORC1 activity is associated with responsiveness to MEK inhibition (PD0325901) in gastric cancer cells.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Since gastric cancer (GC) is characterized by amplifications of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) and KRAS, targeting the RTK/KRAS downstream pathways could contribute to broader applicability of molecular targeted therapy in GC. Here, we assembled a panel of 49 GC cell lines and screened predictors for responsiveness to RAF/MEK/ERK pathway inhibition by comparing their sensitivity to MEK inhibition with alteration status of RTK/KRAS and phosphorylation status of RTK/KRAS downstream molecules. We found that GC cells with MET amplification or KRAS mutation tend to be sensitive to MEK inhibition. Furthermore, lower phosphorylation levels of mTORC1 targets, p70S6K and 4EBP1, was also significantly associated with sensitivity to MEK inhibition. Interestingly, the sensitive cells showed reduced mTORC1 activity accompanied by decreased rate of protein synthesis after MEK inhibition, suggesting that antiproliferative effect of MEK inhibition may be exerted through inhibition of protein synthesis, which was caused by reduced mTORC1 activity. Mechanistically, expression of some mTORC1 negative regulators, such as DDIT4, FOXO3, SESN1 and TSC1, were induced by MEK inhibition in highly-sensitive cell lines and knockdown of these negative regulators partially alleviated the suppression of mTORC1 activity and antiproliferative effect of MEK inhibition. Our data suggest that a subset of GCs, which would be distinguishable according to the predictive markers we identified, may be sensitive to MEK inhibition and have implications for the strategy in clinical trial of MEK inhibitors for GC.

DESIGN
To identify genes specifically induced in MEK inhibitor-sensitive cell lines after MEK inhibition, we treated MEK inhibitor (PD0325901)-sensitive (HSC57 and SNU719) and -resistant (SH-10-TC and TMK1) cell lines with 1µM PD0325901 for 3 h. Then, RNAs were extracted from these cells and susequently subjected to gene expression-microarray analysis. The expression levels were normalized by the median expression for the all 24 samples (each 4 cell lines n=3) and expressed as log2ratio.

