TITLE
The effect of palmitate on gene expression profile in proliferating myoblasts

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
High-fat diet or exposure to saturated fatty acids affects skeletal muscle growth and function. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of palmitate on the transcriptomic profile of mouse C2C12 myoblasts. Global gene expression was evaluated using whole mouse genome oligonucleotide microarrays, and the results were validated through real-time PCR. A total of 4047genes were identified as differentially expressed, including 3492 down-regulated and 555 up-regulated genes during 48-h-exposure to palmitate (0.1 mmol/l). Functional classification showed the involvement of PA-regulated genes in several processes which regulate cell growth. In conclusion, palmitate modifies the expression of genes associated with: i) myoblast responsiveness to hormones and growth factors, ii) cytokine and growth factor expression, and iii) regulation of cell-cell cell-matrix communication. Such alterations can affect myoblast growth and differentiation, however further studies in this field are required. To whom the correspondence should be addressed: Dr K. Grzelkowska-Kowalczyk; e-mail: k_grzel_kow@poczta.fm, tel/fax: (48 22) 847 24 52

DESIGN
After scanning of hybridized microarrays, quantitation of slide images was performed using Feature Extraction Software (Agilent) using default parameters and the raw data were exported to GeneSpring GX 12 (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) and log2 transformed. For identification of genes significantly altered in cell compared with the control normal gene set. Total detected entities were filtered by flags (detected, non detected) and error (coefficient of variation: CV < 50.0 percent) to remove very low signal entities and to select reproducible signal values of entities among the replicated experiments, respectively. In statistical analysis, separated for experiment with myoblasts treated with  palmitate acid was used t-test unpaired (p < 0.05) with multiple testing correction: Benjamini-Hochberg < 0.05, all significant changes over fold change 1.6 were selected.

