TITLE
Discovery of a Drug that Targets a Diabetes Gene identified by GWAS

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
A robust system using disease relevant cells to systematically evaluate the role in diabetes for loci identified through genome wide association studies (GWAS) is urgently needed. Toward this goal, we created isogenic mutant human embryonic stem cell (hESC) lines in GWAS-identified candidate diabetes genes including CDKAL1, KCNQ1 and KCNJ11, and used directed differentiation to evaluate the function of derivative human beta-like cells. The mutations did not affect the generation of insulin+ cells, but impaired insulin secretion both in vitro and in vivo, coinciding with defective glucose homeostasis. CDKAL1-/- insulin+ cells also displayed hypersensitivity to lipotoxicity. A high-content chemical screen identified a candidate drug that rescued CDKAL1-/--specific defects by inhibiting the AP1 (FOS/JUN) pathway. These studies establish a platform using isogenic hESCs to evaluate the function of GWAS-identified loci, and identify a drug candidate that rescues gene-specific defects, paving the way to precision therapy of metabolic diseases.A robust system using disease relevant cells to systematically evaluate the role in diabetes for loci identified through genome wide association studies (GWAS) is urgently needed. Toward this goal, we created isogenic mutant human embryonic stem cell (hESC) lines in GWAS-identified candidate diabetes genes including CDKAL1, KCNQ1 and KCNJ11, and used directed differentiation to evaluate the function of derivative human beta-like cells. The mutations did not affect the generation of insulin+ cells, but impaired insulin secretion both in vitro and in vivo, coinciding with defective glucose homeostasis. CDKAL1-/- insulin+ cells also displayed hypersensitivity to lipotoxicity. A high-content chemical screen identified a candidate drug that rescued CDKAL1-/--specific defects by inhibiting the AP1 (FOS/JUN) pathway. These studies establish a platform using isogenic hESCs to evaluate the function of GWAS-identified loci, and identify a drug candidate that rescues gene-specific defects, paving the way to precision therapy of metabolic diseases.

DESIGN
RNA-seq was used to compare the gene expression in wildtype and CDKAL1-/- hESC derived insulin-GFP+ cells. In addiiton, RNA-seq was used to compare the gene expression in CDKAL1-/- hESC derived insulin-GFP+ cells cultured in control or high palmitate condition to examine the upregulation of ER stress pathway.

