TITLE
IL-17A plays a central role in the expression of psoriasis signature genes through induction of IkappaB-zeta in keratinocytes

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In psoriasis lesions, a diverse mixture of cytokines is upregulated which influence each other generating a complex inflammatory situation. Although this is the case, the inhibition of Interleukin-17A (IL-17A) alone showed unprecedented clinical results in patients, indicating that IL-17A is a critical inducer of psoriasis pathogenesis. To elucidate IL-17A-driven keratinocyte-intrinsic signaling pathways, we treated monolayers of normal human epidermal keratinocytes in vitro with a mixture of 6 cytokines (IL-17A, TNF-a, IL-17C, IL-22, IL-36g and IFN-g) involved in psoriasis, to mimic the inflammatory milieu in psoriasis lesions. Microarray and gene set enrichment analysis revealed that this cytokine mixture induced similar gene expression changes with the previous transcriptome studies using psoriasis lesions. Importantly, we identified a set of IL-17A-regulated genes in keratinocytes, which recapitulate typical psoriasis genes exemplified by DEFB4A, S100A7, IL19 and CSF3, based on differences in the expression profiles of cells stimulated with 6 cytokines versus cells stimulated with only 5 cytokines lacking IL-17A. Furthermore a specific IL-17A-induced gene, NFKBIZ, which encodes IkappaB-zeta, a transcriptional regulator for NF-kappaB, was demonstrated to have a significant role for IL-17A-induced gene expression. Thus, we present novel in vitro data from normal human keratinocytes that would help elucidating the IL-17A-driven keratinocyte activation in psoriasis.

DESIGN
Cytokine mixture-induced gene expression in primary normal human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEKs) was measured at 24 hours after exposure.  NHEKs were exposed to the combination of selected six cytokines (IL-17A: 100 ng/ml, TNF-a: 10 ng/ml, IFN-g: 10 ng/ml, IL-17C: 100 ng/ml, IL-22: 100 ng/ml, IL-36g: 500 ng/ml) , or to the different combinations of five of the six cytokines (in total, 7 different treatments and one untreated control). No replicate experiments were conducted.

