TITLE
Comparison of the transcriptomes of a Burkholeria pseudomallei bprR [bpss0688] mutant, a bprS [bpss0687] mutant and a bprRS double mutant with the wild-type B. pseudomallei K96243 parent strain.

ORGANISM
Burkholderia pseudomallei K96243

SUMMARY
Objectives: The Burkholderia pseudomallei bprR and bprS genes are predicted to encode the response regulator and sensor kinase components respectively of a two component signal transduction system. Inactivation of either single component of this two component signal transduction system led to attenuation of B. pseudomallei virulence and also reduced motility. However, inactivation of both components resulted in wild-tpe virulence and motility. Therefore, we used RNA-seq to compare the transcritptomes of the three mutant strains (bprR single, bprS single, bprRS double mutant) with the wild-type parent strain in order to identify the genes differenty regulated in the different mutants.

DESIGN
Methods: RNA sequencing was employed to determine the transcriptomes of three mutant strains (bprR single, bprS single, bprRS double mutant) with the wild-type parent strain B. pseudomallei K96243. B. pseudomallei parent strain K96243 and the directed bprS, bprR and bprRS  mutants were grown overnight at 37 °C in LB with appropriate antibiotics (K96243 in gentamicin 64 µg/ml; mutants in gentamicin 64 µg/ml and tetracycline 25 µg/ml). Strains were subcultured 1/50 into fresh antibiotic-free medium and grown at 37 °C with shaking (200 rpm) to an OD600 of 0.5. The cells were harvested by centrifugation, and RNA purified using Trizol reagent (Gibco/BRL) as specified by the manufacturer. RNA was DNase treated using the TURBO DNA-free kit (Ambion), followed by processing with a QIAGEN RNeasy kit clean-up with on-column DNase digestion as per the manufacturer’s instruction. Double-stranded cDNA synthesis and high-throughput RNA-seq were performed as described previously (Henry R, Crane B, Powell D, Deveson Lucas D, et al: The transcriptomic response of Acinetobacter baumannii to colistin and doripenem alone and in combination in an in vitro pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics model. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2015; 70:1303-1313). For each strain three biological replicates were sequenced.

