TITLE
RNA-Seq Analysis of Anacardic Acid Treated MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 Breast Cancer Cell Lines

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Anacardic acid (AnAc) is a mixture of 6-alkylbenzoic acid congeners that are produced in a number of plants. Previously, we showed a specific congener AnAc 24:1n5 acts as a nuclear receptor alternate site modulator (NRAM) to inhibit breast cancer cells in an estrogen receptor (ER)-dependent manner by interfering with ER-DNA binding. AnAc 24:1n5 also inhibited the growth of a triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell line, through an undefined mechanism. Additional work from our labs  indicated AnAc 24:1n5 inhibits prostaglandin synthase and that inhibition is more specific to COX-2. Reports from other investigators indicate AnAc has a number of interesting potential pharmacological targets. We previously used qRT-PCR to investigate expression changes in endogenous estrogen-regulated genes, i.e., TFF1, CCND1, and CTSD in breast cancer cell lines. However, since AnAc has the capacity of effect multiple molecular targets and since we detected an ER-independent inhibition of breast cancer cell proliferation, we suspect additional unknown molecular targets are affected in breast cancer cells. Identification of such targets using RNA-seq would be quite beneficial in targeting TNBC which primarily affects premenopausal women with a predominance in women of African and Latina ancestry.  The goal of this portion of the project is to use next-generation RNA-SEQ to identify alterations in molecular target sequence levels in ER-positive and -negative breast cancer cell lines treated with AnAc.

DESIGN
There are two breast cancer cell lines used in this study, including MCF-7 (invasive breast ductal carcinoma; estrogen receptor positive (ER+); progesterone receptor positive (PR+); human epidermal growth factor 2 negative (HER2-)) and MDA-MB-231 (breast adenocarcinoma; triple negative – ER-; PR-; HER2-).  Each of these cell lines was treated with anacardic acid (AnActrt) with three replicates each, resulting in a total of 12 RNA samples.  One MDA-MB-231 control sample and one MDA-MB-231 AnActrt treated sample were removed after QA/QC determined they were likely contaminated samples.

