TITLE
Reorganization of HoxD regulatory landscapes during the evolution of a snake-like body plan (ChIP-seq)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
While the vertebrate body plan is highly conserved amongst all species of this taxon, extreme variations thereof can be documented in snakes, which display both an absence of limbs and an unusually elongated trunk. As Hox genes are strong candidates both for the making and the evolution of this body plan, their comparative study in such a morphologically diverged group is informative regarding their potential causative importance in these processes. In this work we use an interspecies comparative approach where different aspects of regulation at the HoxD locus are investigated. We find that although spatial collinearity and associated epigenetic mark dynamics are conserved in the corn snake, other regulatory modalities have been largely restructured. A BAC transgenic approach indeed revealed that, while the majority of mesodermal enhancers in vertebrates appear to be mostly located outside of the cluster, the corn snake contains most mesodermal trunk enhancers within the HoxD cluster. We also find that, despite the absence of limbs and an altered Hoxd gene regulation in external genitalia, the bimodal chromatin structure at the corn snake HoxD locus is maintained. The analysis of particular enhancer sequences initially defined in the mouse and further isolated at the snake orthologous locus showed differences in their specificities for the limb and genital bud expression. Of particular interest, a snake counterpart of a mouse limb-only enhancer sequence evolved into a genital-only enhancer. Such a regulatory exaptation suggests that enhancer versatility may have been an important factor to accompany the transition towards the snake body plan. These results show that vertebrate morphological evolution is likely to have been associated with extensive reorganization at the HoxD regulatory landscapes while respecting a very conserved general regulatory framework.

DESIGN
ChIP-seq analysis of H3K27me3 in corn snake brain and posterior trunk, H3K9me3 in corn snake  brain and H3K27ac in mouse and snake upper trunk

