TITLE
Gene expression in Zfp36l3 wildtype and knockout trophoblast stem cells and placenta

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The ZFP36L3 protein is a rodent-specific, placenta- and yolk sac-specific member of the tristetraprolin (TTP) family of CCCH tandem zinc finger proteins.  These proteins bind to AU-rich elements in target mRNAs, and promote their deadenylation and decay.  We addressed the hypotheses that the absence of ZFP36L3 would result in the accumulation of target transcripts in placenta and/or yolk sac, and that some of these would be important for female reproductive physiology and overall fecundity.   Mice deficient in ZFP36L3 exhibited decreased neonatal survival rates, but no apparent morphological changes in the placenta or surviving offspring.  We found Zfp36l3 to be paternally imprinted, with profound parent-of-origin effects on gene expression.  The protein was highly expressed in the syncytiotrophoblast cells of the labyrinth layer of the placenta, and the epithelial cells of the yolk sac.  RNA-Seq of placental mRNA from Zfp36l3 KO mice revealed many significantly up-regulated transcripts, whereas there were few changes in KO yolk sacs.  Many of the up-regulated placental transcripts exhibited decreased decay rates in differentiated trophoblast stem cells derived from KO blastocysts.   Several dozen transcripts were deemed high probability targets of ZFP36L3; these include proteins known to be involved in trophoblast and placenta physiology.  The type 1 transferrin receptor mRNA was unexpectedly decreased in KO placentas, despite an increase in its stability in KO stem cells.  This receptor is critical for placental iron uptake, and its decrease was accompanied by decreased iron stores in the KO fetus, suggesting that this intrauterine deficiency might have deleterious consequences in later life.

DESIGN
Four biological replicates were analyzed for each trophoblast stem cell condition.  There are 8 different conditons: wild type and knockout undifferentiated, differentiated 0h ActD, differentiated 2h ActD, differentiated 4h ActD.  Five biological replicates were analyzed for wild type and knockout placenta.  Three replicates were analyzed for heterozygous placenta.  There are two types of heterozygous placentas: maternal or paternal transmission of the mutant allele.

