TITLE
Enhanced Bone Regeneration Associated with Decreased Apoptosis in Mice with Partial HIF-1Alpha Deficiency

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
HIF-1a activates genes under hypoxia and was hypothesized to regulate bone regeneration.  Surprisingly, HET HIF-1a fracture calluses are larger, stronger and stiffer than WT HIF-1a calluses due to decreased apoptosis.  These data identify apoptosis inhibition as a means to enhance bone regeneration. Introduction: Bone regeneration subsequent to fracture involves the synergistic activation of multiple signaling pathways.  Localized hypoxia following fracture activates hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1a) leading to increased expression of HIF-1 target genes.  We therefore hypothesized that HIF-1a is a key regulator of bone regeneration Materials and Methods: Fixed femoral fractures were generated in mice with partial HIF-1a deficiency (HET HIF-1a) and wild type littermates (WT HIF-1a).  Fracture calluses and intact contralateral femurs from post fracture day (PFD) 21 and 28 (N=5-10) were subjected to MicroCT evaluation and 4-point bending in order to assess morphometric and mechanical properties.  Molecular analyses were carried out on PFD 7, 10 and 14 samples (N=3) to determine differential gene expression at both mRNA and protein levels.  Finally, TUNEL staining was performed on PFD 14 samples (N=2) to elucidate differential apoptosis. Results: Surprisingly, fracture calluses from HET HIF-1a mice exhibit greater mineralization and are larger, stronger and stiffer.  Microarray analyses focused on hypoxia-induced genes revealed differential expression (between genotypes) of several genes associated with the apoptotic pathway.  Real-time PCR confirmed these results, demonstrating higher expression of pro-apoptotic PP2A and lower expression of anti-apoptotic BCL2 in WT HIF-1a calluses.  Subsequent TUNEL staining demonstrates that WT HIF-1a calluses contain larger numbers of TUNEL positive chondrocytes and osteoblasts than HET HIF-1a calluses. Conclusions: We conclude that partial HIF-1a deficiency results in decreased chondrocytic and osteoblastic apoptosis; thereby allowing the development of larger, stiffer calluses and enhancing bone regeneration.  Furthermore, apoptosis inhibition may be a promising target for developing new treatments to accelerate bone regeneration. Keywords: Bone, Fracture, Apoptosis, Hypoxia, Microarray

