TITLE
Overlapping DNA methylation dynamics in mouse intestinal cell differentiation and early stages of malignant progression

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Mouse models of intestinal crypt cell differentiation and tumorigenesis have been used to characterize the molecular mechanisms underlying both processes. DNA methylation is a key epigenetic mark and plays an important role in cell identity and differentiation programs and cancer.  To get insights into the dynamics of cell differentiation and malignant transformation we have compared the DNA methylation profiles along the mouse small intestine crypt and early stages of carcinogenesis. Genome-scale analysis of DNA methylation together with microarray gene expression have been applied to compare intestinal crypt stem cells (EphB2positive), differentiated cells (EphB2negative), ApcMin/+ adenomas and the corresponding non-tumor adjacent tissue, together with small and large intestine samples and the colon cancer cell line CT26.   Compared with late stages, small intestine crypt differentiation and early stages of carcinogenesis display few and relatively small changes in DNA methylation. Hypermethylated loci are largely shared by the two processes and affect the proximities of promoter and enhancer regions, with enrichment in genes regulated by PRC2 and associated with the intestinal stem cell signature. The hypermethylation is progressive, with minute levels in differentiated cells, as compared with intestinal stem cells, and reaching full methylation in advanced stages. Hypomethylation shows different signatures in differentiation and cancer and is already present in the non-tumor tissue adjacent to the adenomas in ApcMin/+mice, but at lower levels than advanced cancers. Taking into account the parallelisms between human and mouse intestinal carcinogenesis, this study provides a reference framework to interpret the alterations found in human cancer.

DESIGN
We have analyzed ApcMin/+ adenomas and the corresponding non-tumor adjacent tissue, together with small and large intestine samples and the colon cancer cell line CT26. Samples were in triplicates, except for  tissue adjacent to adenoma (in duplicates).

