TITLE
Transcriptome analysis of Arabidopsis microgametogenesis

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Aims We aim to use transcriptome analysis to establish on a genome-wide scale the identity and regulatory clusters of genes that specify microgametogenesis from the haploid microspore to mature functional pollen in Arabidopsis. Background Pollen as the haploid male gametophyte plays a vital role in plant fertility and crop production through the ability to deliver the male gametes in fertilisation. Despite the obvious importance for plant fertility and crop production we have a very limited understanding of the regulatory mechanisms that have evolved to specify male gametophyte development and functions and less than 150 genes have been identified that are gametophytically expressed in the anther.The availability of functional genomic resources now provides the opportunity to undertake a comprehensive approach to describing cellular development in terms of the transcriptome. This approach is particularly powerful where the complete transcriptome of a single developing cell can be analysed. The male gametophyte is a uniquely accessible cell type for such studies, enabling RNA analysis from distinct purified cell populations during development.The proposed experiments are designed to support a current application (P19208, Twell) to investigate the gametophytic transcriptome and transcription factor networks. The results obtained will extend our knowledge of the contribution of haploid gene expression to anther development and will be used directly to extend BBSRC funded work (P15086, Wilson) to investigate the role and targets the MALE STERILE 1 gene (MS1). In particular the data will be used in collaboration to extract haploid gene expression from datasets of transcriptome analysis of staged flower buds of wild type (Ler) and ms1.  This work will also complement BBSRC funded work on sporogenesis (G13338, Dickinson and Scott) and meiosis (G15941, Franklin and Jones) that are focussed on earlier steps in anther development. Biological material and methods.  Isolated microspores and pollen at 4 different developmental stages will be analysed. We will isolate spores from developmentally staged buds of Ler grown under defined growth conditions. Buds from several batches of 100 plants will be rapidly sorted into 4 groups according to developmental age, uninucleate microspores (UM), bicellular pollen (BP) tricellular pollen (TP) and mature pollen. Spores will be released by gentle mechanical tissue disruption and purified by filtration and purification of spores. We are confident that our spore isolation procedures are rigorous since we could not detect even trace expression of highly abundant sporophytic transcripts such RbcS and Cab transcripts in microarray data from pollen RNA. Keywords: development_or_differentiation_design

