TITLE
Effect of locally applied enalapril maleate on the gene expression profile in dorsal skin after UVB irradiation

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Renin-angiotensin system regulates cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis and tissue remodeling in skin. Previouly, we reported that angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) expression and angiotensin II level were enhanced by repeated UVB-irradiation of hairless mice skin, and ACE inhibitor enalapril maleate accelerated recovery of UVB-induced wrinkle. In present study, we analyzed gene expression with DNA microarray and protein distribution with immunofluorecence method to clarify the process of wrinkle repairing with enalapril maleate in UVB-irradiated hairless mouse.  In microarray analysis, we detected up-regulation of various extracullular matrix (ECM) genes and ECM related genes. In immunofluorescence, we confirm that type 1 collagen, fibrillin1, elastin, and dystroglycan 1 were decreased by repeated UVB-irradiation and the distribution of these components were improved by enalapril maleate treatment. In addition, ADAMTS2 and MMP-14, these were perticipate in ECM structure formation and degradation, were increased in enalapril maleate-treated mouse skin. While the functions of these molecules in skin is not clear yet, it is suggested that these molecules participate in improvement of wrinkles induced by UVB-irradiation. SUBMITTER_CITATION: Yuko Matsuura-Hachiya, Yuji Nakai, Keiko Abe, Toshio Nishiyama, Koji Y. Arai (2015) " Recovery of extracellular matrix components by enalapril maleate during the repair process of ultraviolet B-induced wrinkles in mouse skin " , Biochemistry and Biophysics Reports 4, 180-186, doi:10.1016/j.bbrep.2015.09.012

DESIGN
Male hairless mice of the SKH-1 strain were purchased from Charles River Laboratories Japan, Inc. (Tokyo, Japan). These animals were approximately 6 weeks old at the start of the experiment. They were fed a commercial diet (CRF-1, Oriental Yeast Co., Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) ad libitum and allowed free access to water. The dorsal region of the mouse was repeatedly irradiated with UVB for 10 weeks. Enalapril maleate treatment was started at 1 week after 10-week irradiation. One hundred microliters of 1% w/v enalapril maleate dissolved in 30 vol % ethanol solution or 30 vol % ethanol (control) was applied 5 times a week for 2 consecutive weeks to the whole dorsal skin of each of the mice. All experimental procedures using mice were approved by the Animal Experiment Committee of Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology (approval number 24-82).   The dosal region of the mouse was repeatedly irradiated with UVB for 10 weeks. Enalapril maleate treatment was started at 1 week after 10-week irradiation. One hundred microliters of 1% w/v enalapril maleate dissolved in 30 vol % ethanol solution or 30 vol % ethanol (control) was applied 5 times a week for 2 or 6 consecutive weeks to the whole dorsal skin of each of the mice. Each of the experimental groups comprised 6 mice. After 2- or 6-week drug treatment, skin samples were collected for microarray analysis.

