TITLE
Chronic low-dose-irradiation of Drosophila melanogaster larvae induces gene expression changes and enhances locomotive behavior

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Although radiation effects have been extensively studied, the biological effects of low-dose radiation (LDR) are controversial. This study investigates LDR-induced alterations in locomotive behavior and gene expression profiles of Drosophila melanogaster. We measured locomotive behavior using larval pupation height and rapid iterative negative geotaxis (RING) assay after exposure to 0.1 Gy gamma-radiation (dose rate of 16.7 mGy/h). We also observed chronic LDR effects on development (pupation and eclosion rates) and longevity (life span). To identify chronic LDR effects on gene expression, we performed whole-genome expression analysis using gene-expression microarrays, and confirmed the results using quantitative real-time PCR. Pupation height was significantly higher after LDR treatment at the first larval instar. Locomotive behavior of male flies was significantly greater approximately 3­5 weeks after LDR, but pupation and eclosion rates and life spans were not significantly different. Genome-wide expression analysis identified 344 genes that were differentially expressed in irradiated larvae compared with those of controls. We identified several genes belonging to larval behavior functional groups such as locomotive behavior and oxidation reduction, and genes involved in conventional functional groups modulated by irradiation such as defense response, sensory and perception. Four candidate genes were confirmed as differentially expressed genes in irradiated larvae using qRT-PCR. These data suggest that LDR stimulates locomotion-related genes, and these genes can be used as potential markers for LDR.

DESIGN
Eggs were collected from 5-day-old female flies and cultivated for 24 h on standard medium. Then, twenty larvae were manually selected and seeded on fresh standard medium in a new vial. After transfer, the experimental group of first-instar larvae was immediately irradiated with chronic gamma-radiation at a dose rate of 16.7 mGy/h. After treatment, gamma-irradiated flies and non-irradiated control flies were maintained in the same incubator at 25degC.

