TITLE
An investigation into transcriptional changes in developing Arabidopsis leaf caused by novel signalling protein, SPH1.

ORGANISM
Arabidopsis thaliana

SUMMARY
Arabidopsis genome sequencing has revealed the presence of at least three extensive gene families that may encode protein ligands. One of these, the SPH (S-protein homologue) family, was identified as a direct result of our studies on self-incompatibility in Papaver. The Arabidopsis SPH gene family consists of 81 members. We have initiated experimental work on a subset of these. RT-PCR studies indicate that many, if not all, SPH genes are expressed. Each SPH gene encodes an N-terminal signal peptide sequence and thus SPH proteins are likely to be secreted. Until recently none of the genes in this family had known function. However we have evidence that one member of the family, SPH1 is involved in leaf vascular development. In order to determine the function of SPH1, Arabidopsis plants were transformed with an SPH1 antisense construct. Analysis of the mutant phenotype shows that whilst plants appear as wt until principal growth stage 1.04, they subsequently show severe morphological defects. Plants are severely dwarfed with twisted rosette leaves at ~ 30% wt length and width as well as shortened inflorescence stem. Closer examination revealed aberrant leaf vasculature and severe reduction in expansion of parenchyma cells surrounding the primary leaf vein. We have conducted preliminary immunolocalisation studies with antibody raised to SPH1. These suggest that SPH1 protein is secreted by cells within the developing vasculature of the immature leaf (leaves < 6mm in length). The data that we have so far obtained leads us to believe that SPH1 protein acts as a signalling molecule during early leaf development. As SPH1 is likely to be a signalling protein it is assumed that its interaction with a cognate receptor results in initiation of developmental processes within leaf tissue. The purpose of the experiment is to determine the network of genes within the normally developing rosette leaf whose expression is altered by SPH1. This will be accomplished by comparing transcriptional levels in rosette leaves of antisense-SPH1 plants with wt plants. We propose to make target RNA from rosette leaves taken from plants at principal stage 1.05 (immediately after initial appearance of developmental abnormality) and from plants at principal stage 1.14 (where gross changes are apparent). We propose to use replicate slides for each hybridisation, i.e. 2 hybridised to RNA from wt leaves at 1.05, 2 antisense at 1.05, 2 wt at 1.14 and 2 antisense at 1.14. Keywords: genetic_modification_design

