TITLE
Temperature-dependent transcriptional response under anaerobic C and N limitations in Yeast

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
The global transcriptional response of Saccharomyces cerevisiae was investigated in low temperature chemostat cultures grown in carbon or nitrogen limitation. During steady state chemostats, the growth rates and in vivo fluxes were kept constant however the growth-limiting nutrient was significantly higher at 12oC than at 30oC and had significant effects on transcriptional responses. Growth at 12oC resulted in a rearrangement of transporters for the limiting nutrient, where hexose transporters (HXTs) and ammonium permeases (MEPs) were differentially expressed in cultures grown at 30oC in carbon and nitrogen limitations, respectively. In addition, we found repression of genes encoding proteins in reserve carbohydrates metabolism and metabolism of alternative carbon or nitrogen sources other than glucose or ammonia. However, there were also similar responses when the transcriptional response was evaluated regardless of the growth-limiting nutrient. In particular, induction of ribosome biogenesis genes emphasizes the significance of transcription and translational adaptation at low temperature. In contrast, genes encoding proteins during stress response were downregulated. This down-regulation of stress elements better known as environmental stress response (ESR) is in contradiction with previous low temperature transcriptome analyses. During continuous steady state low temperature cultivation, ESR no longer plays an integral role in S. cerevisiae’s response to temperature change. Similarly, trehalose accumulation, consistent with its gene expression, was not indispensable for growth at 12oC. This response, however, does not exclude that ESR may be required for transition phase in low temperature growth when cells are transferred from one temperature to another. Keywords: chemostat temperature 12 degree celsuis 30 degree celsius

