TITLE
Effects of dietary curcumin on the colon proteome and transcriptome in the Mdr1a-/- mouse model of inflammatory bowel disease

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
This study assessed gene expression changes associated with inflammation in the colon tissue of multi-drug resistance targeted mutation (Mdr1a-/-) mice, a model of human IBD. It also tested the anti-inflammatory potential of curcumin in the colon of these mice with a particular focus on the proteome. A colonic histological injury score was determined for each mouse to assess the level of colon inflammation in Mdr1a-/- mice, and to establish the effect of curcumin on inflammation. Insights into mechanisms of colonic inflammation in the Mdr1a-/- mice were gained using transcriptome (microarray) and proteome (2-D gel electrophoresis and LCMS protein identification) analyses. These data were compared to changes in the colon proteome in response to curcumin, and to previously described transcriptomic analyses [Nones et al, PMID: 18761777; GSE10684] in response to curcumin, in this model.

DESIGN
A total of 24 male Mdr1a-/- mice, and 24 male FVB/N mice, purchased from Taconic (Hudson, NY, USA) at 4-5 weeks of age, were used for this study. 12 mice were randomly assigned to each of two different dietary groups: control (AIN-76A powdered diet), or curcumin (AIN-76A + 0.2% curcumin). At 21 and 24 weeks of age, mice were euthanized and colon samples taken for histological, microarray, and proteomics analyses. The total histology score (HIS) in the colon was determined according to previously described criteria. Total RNA was isolated using TRIzol® reagent. Colon RNA from four Mdr1a-/- mice (with high HIS) on the control diet (i.e. AIN-76A powdered diet) was compared with colon RNA from four FVB/N mice with low HIS also on the control diet (i.e. AIN-76A powdered diet). All individual RNA samples were hybridized against a common reference RNA on separate slides. The reference RNA was prepared using equimolar RNA extracts from small intestine, colon, kidney and liver of normal healthy growing Swiss mice plus RNA extracts from Swiss mouse fetuses. These data were compared with previously reported transcriptomics analysis of colon RNA from the same four Mdr1a-/- mice on the AIN-76A diet (with high HIS) compared with colon RNA from four Mdr1a-/- mice on the curcumin diet (with low HIS; Nones et al 2009, PMID: 18761777)

