TITLE
Local crosstalk between the lipid deposition and skeletal muscle growth inhibition from Bama minipig obesity model by high-fat high-sucrose diet

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
The underlying mechanism of how the atopic lipids in skeletal muscle affect muscle growth remains elusive. Here we chose miniature Bama swine as our model to mimick human obesity and co-associated metabolic disorders by long time diet induction and study how the atopic fat accumulation in skeletal muscle influence muscle function. After 23 months high-fat high-sucrose diet (HFHSD) fed, the model minipig model of obesity accompanied with metabolic disorders like human, and they had increased body weight and extensive lipids deposition in adipose tissues (AT) and non-AT, especially in skeletal muscle. Further more, the mass of skeletal reduced greatly and the small area (0-2000μm2) muscle reduced after diet induced. The average fiber area of Gastroc reduced 25.2%, but no significant changes appeared in the other skeletal muscles. Antioxidant capacity of skeletal muscle also reduced. Microarray profiles showed genes related to fat deposition promotion (Peroxisome proliferator activated receptor γ, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein α and apolipoprotein E), muscle growth inhibition (myostatin and p21) up regulated, and some other muscle cell differentiation related genes (myoD) down regulated. Meanwhile, adipokines like adiponectin and 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11βHSD1) which partake in the crosstalk between AT and skeletal muscles rose up. We draw a clear potential crosstalk pathway that, increased 11βHSD1 secreted by excess AT will promote the expression of the major inhibitor MSTN by activating corticosterone to cortisol, leading to the growth inhibition of skeletal muscle. Overall, this research announces how obesity affects skeletal muscle growth in a crosstalk sight.

DESIGN
Male and female Bama minipigs, aged 6 months at the start of the study, were divided into the following two groups for 23 months of treatment. Bama minipigon control (CD group, N=3) were fed standard pig chow. The experimental group (N=6) were fed high-fat high-sucrose diet (53% basal diet, 37% sucrose, 10% lard, HFHSD).

