TITLE
Detecting the effects of Cd and PCBs by means of a non-invasive transcriptomic approach in laboratory- and wild-contaminated European eels (Anguilla anguilla)

ORGANISM
Anguilla anguilla

SUMMARY
Our main objectives were: 1) to test whether the caudal fin may be used to detect the effects of pollutant exposure by means of DNA microarray; 2) to test whether the fin may be used to detect the effects of pollutants in wild contaminated fish; 3) to investigate the mechanisms of toxicity for Cd metal. Detecting and unraveling specific effects of contaminants in a multi-stress field context remain a major challenge in ecotoxicology. The aim of this study was to apply a previously developed DNA microarray comprising 1000 candidate genes on caudal fin clips in order to assess the usefulness of a non-invasive method in ecotoxicogenomic studies in the European eel. Fin gene expression patterns of eels exposed in laboratory to Cd or a PCBs mixture were compared to test whether fin clips may be used to detect effects of these contaminants. Then, gene transcription profiles of wild fish from 3 sampling sites with differing contamination levels were compared to experimental exposures to test whether fin could detect and unravel the in situ effects of these contaminants. Also, transcriptomic profiles from liver and caudal fin of eels experimentally exposed to Cd were compared to test whether fins may be used to investigate the toxicity mechanisms of this metal. Our results showed distinct fin transcription profiles in response to Cd or PCBs exposure. In addition, the transcription profiles of eels from the most contaminated site clustered with the laboratory-exposed fish. Finally, gene transcription patterns from caudal fin and liver in Cd-exposed eels showed significant differences between the two organs and only 16 common genes were identified. Many of these genes were found to be involved in tissue development and in epigenetic mechanisms. This study thus demonstrates the applicability and usefulness of performing gene transcription assays on non-invasive tissue sampling in order to assess the effect of Cd and PCBs on the transcriptome of fish.

