TITLE
Endothelial Inflammatory Transcriptional Responses to an Altered Serum Exposome Following Inhalation of Diesel Emissions

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Air pollution, especially emissions derived from traffic sources, is associated with adverse cardiovascular outcomes.  However, it remains unclear how inhaled factors drive an extrapulmonary pathology, as the lung is an effective barrier for solid particulates and many gases. Previously, using plasma from healthy human subjects exposed to diesel exhaust under controlled conditions, we found that canonical inflammatory response transcripts of interleukin-8 (IL-8), intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) were elevated in endothelial cells treated wih plasma obtained after exposure compared with pre-exposure samples or filtered air (sham) exposures. While the findings confirmed the presence of bioactive factor(s) in the plasma after diesel inhalation, we wanted to better examine the complete genomic response to investigate 1) major responsive transcripts and 2) collected response pathways and ontogeny that may help to refine this method. Thus, we assayed previousy collected RNA with microarray chips, examining the responses of cultured endothelial cells to plasma obtained from 6 healthy human subjects exposed to 100 μg/m3 diesel exhaust or filtered air for 2 h on separate occasions. In addition to pre-exposure baseline samples, we investigated samples obtained immediately post and 24h post exposure.  Primary human coronary artery endothelial cells were grown to confluence and treated with 10% plasma for 24 h, followed by isolation of RNA for microarrays. Microarray analysis of the coronary artery endothelial cells challenged with plasma identified 855 probes that change over time following diesel exhaust exposure. Over-representation analysis identified inflammatory cytokine pathways were upregulated both at the 2 and 24 h condition. These outcomes are consistent with our recent findings that plasma contains bioactive and inflammatory factors following pollutant inhalation and provide a novel pathway to explain the well-reported extrapulmonary toxicity of ambient air pollutants.

DESIGN
There are 48 total samples representing three time points from two different conditions (air or diesel emissions) from eight study subjects.

