TITLE
Pathogenic pathways are activated in each major cell type of the glomerulus in the Cd2ap mutant   mouse model of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Mutations in several genes expressed in podocytes, including Cd2ap, have been associated with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis in humans. Mutant mouse models provide an opportunity to better understand the molecular pathology that drives these diseases. In this report we use a battery of transgenic-GFP mice to facilitate the purification of all three major cell types of the glomerulus from Cd2ap mutant mice. Both microarrays and RNA-seq were used to characterize the gene expression profiles of the podocytes, mesangial cells and endothelial cells, providing a global dual platform cross-validating dataset. The mesangial cells showed increased expression of profibrotic factors, including thrombospondin, Tgfb2 and Tgfb3, as well as the angiogenesis factor Vegf. They also showed upregulation of protective genes, including Aldh1a2, involved in retinoic acid synthesis, and Decorin, a Tgfb antagonist. Of interest, the mesangial cells also showed significant expression of Wt1, which has generally been considered podocyte specific. The Cd2ap mutant podocytes showed upregulation of proteases as well as genes involved in muscle and vasculature development, and showed a very strong gene expression signature indicating programmed cell death. Endothelial cells showed increased expression of the leukocyte adhesion associated factors Vcam1 and Sele, as well as Midkine (promoting angiogenesis), endothelin, and many genes responsive to cytokines and interferons. This study provides a comprehensive analysis of the changing properties of the three cell types of the glomerulus in Cd2ap mutants, identifying activated and repressed pathways and responsible genes, thereby delivering a deeper molecular understanding of this genetic disease.

DESIGN
All three major cell types of the glomerulus were FACS purified from CD2AP-/- mutant mice and normal controls and gene expression profiled with Affymetrix Mouse Exon 1.0 ST arrays. Data was analyzed with GeneBASE software.  Biological triplicates were performed.

