TITLE
Transcriptome profiling of RNAi-trasgenic Solanum lycopersicum plants resistant to Tomato yellow leaf curl virus

ORGANISM
Solanum lycopersicum

SUMMARY
RNA interference (RNAi) is a widely-used approach to generate virus-resistant transgenic crops. However, durability of RNAi-mediated resistance under extreme field conditions and side-effects of stable RNAi expression have not been thoroughly investigated.  Here we performed field trials and molecular characterization of two RNAi-transgenic Solanum lycopersicum lines resistant to Tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV) disease, the major constraint for tomato cultivation in Cuba and worldwide. In order to determine potential impact of the hairpin RNA transgene expression on tomato genome expression and development, differences in the phenotypes and the transcriptome profiles between the transgenic and non-transgenic plants were examined. Transcriptome profiling revealed a common set of up- and down-regulated tomato genes, which correlated with slight developmental abnormalities in both transgenic lines.

DESIGN
Two RNAi transgenic TYLCV-resistant tomato (Solanum lycopersicum cv. Campbell) lines  have been generated and were designed as Kanamicin-resistant (KmR) line 126 (designated as T1) and Basta-resistant (BaR) line B1 (designated as T2).  A non-transgenic tomato line (Solanum lycopersicum cv. Campbell), designed as C line, was also taken to perform comparative gene expression analysis with the transgenic lines T1 and T2. Total RNA from control (line C) and transgenic (T1 and T2) lines (two biological replicates from each line) was extracted using standard protocols and linearly amplified to obtain Cy-3 labeled complementary RNA (cRNA) which was hybridized on commercial 4 x 44 K tomato arrays. Hybridization intensities generated after scanning of the arrays were computed to generate the raw intensity data.  Statistical analysis was performed to characterize differences in gene expression profiles, by performing two-group comparative analysis between control and transgenic tomato lines.

