TITLE
A Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain with a minimal complement of glycolytic genes reveals strong redundancies in central metabolism

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
As a result of ancestral whole genome and small-scale duplication events, the genome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae’s, and of many eukaryotes, still contain a substantial fraction of duplicated genes. In all investigated organisms, metabolic pathways, and more particularly glycolysis, are specifically enriched for functionally redundant paralogs. In ancestors of the Saccharomyces lineage, the duplication of glycolytic genes is purported to have played an important role leading to S. cerevisiae current lifestyle favoring fermentative metabolism even in the presence of oxygen and characterized by a high glycolytic capacity. In modern S. cerevisiae, the 12 glycolytic reactions leading to the biochemical conversion from glucose to ethanol are encoded by 27 paralogs. In order to experimentally explore the physiological role of this genetic redundancy, a yeast strain with a minimal set of 14 paralogs was constructed (MG strain). Remarkably, a combination of quantitative, systems approach and of semi-quantitative analysis in a wide array of growth environments revealed the absence of phenotypic response to the cumulative deletion of 13 glycolytic paralogs. This observation indicates that duplication of glycolytic genes is not a prerequisite for achieving the high glycolytic fluxes and fermentative capacities that are characteristic for S. cerevisiae and essential for many of its industrial applications and argues against gene dosage effects as a means for fixing minor glycolytic paralogs in the yeast genome. MG was carefully designed and constructed to provide a robust, prototrophic platform for quantitative studies, and is made available to the scientific community.

DESIGN
The goals of the present study are to experimentally explore genetic redundancy in yeast glycolysis by cumulative deletion of minor paralogs and to provide a new experimental platform for fundamental yeast research by constructing a yeast strain with a functional ‘minimal glycolysis’. To this end, we deleted 13 minor paralogs, leaving only the 14 major paralogs for the S. cerevisiae glycolytic pathway. The cumulative impact of deleting all minor paralogs was investigated by two complementary approaches.  A first, quantitative analysis focused on the impact on glycolytic flux under a number of controlled cultivation conditions that, in wild-type strains, result in different glycolytic fluxes. These quantitative growth studies were combined with transcriptome, enzyme-activity and intracellular metabolite assays to capture potential small phenotypic effects. A second, semi-quantitative characterization explored the phenotype of the ‘minimal glycolysis’ strain under a wide array of experimental conditions to identify potential context-dependent phenotypes

