TITLE
regulation of Listeria monocytogenes internalin-like genes by σB and PrfA as revealed by subgenomic microarray analyses

ORGANISM
Listeria monocytogenes

SUMMARY
The Listeria monocytogenes genome contains more than 20 genes that encode cell surface-associated proteins termed internalins, which are characterized by the presence of multiple leucine-rich repeats.  Subsets of internalin genes have been reported previously as transcriptionally regulated by the stress responsive sigma factor B (inlA, inlB, inlC2 and inlD) and the pleiotropic transcriptional activator PrfA (inlA, inlB, inlC).  To investigate contributions of σB and PrfA to internalin gene regulation, we designed a sub-genomic microarray containing two probes for each of the 24 internalin-like genes present in the L. monocytogenes 10403S genome.  Competitive microarray hybridization was performed on RNA extracted from (i) the 10403S parent strain and an isogenic ΔsigB strain; (ii) 10403S and an isogenic ΔprfA strain; (iii) a 10403S derivative that expresses the constitutively active PrfA* (G155S) and the ΔprfA strain; and (iv) 10403S and an isogenic ΔsigBΔprfA strain.  σB- and PrfA-dependent transcription of selected genes was further confirmed by quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR.  Statistical analyses of microarray data demonstrated that use of two probes on a microarray for a given target gene yielded more reliable transcriptional profiling information than use of a single probe.  The suitability of the PrfA* strain for examining PrfA-dependent gene expression was established quantitatively by the observation that the plcA and prfA transcript levels generated by the PrfA* strain were similar to those obtained from intracellular L. monocytogenes and significantly higher than those in a wildtype strain grown in BHI broth.  Among the 24 internalin-like genes examined, 4 and 6 were positively regulated by PrfA and σB, respectively, including inlA and inlB, which were positively regulated by both PrfA and σB.  In summary, our findings clearly establish broad roles for both PrfA and σB in regulating L. monocytogenes internalin gene expression Keywords: Listeria monocytogenes, Internalins, sigB, PrfA, Microarrays

