TITLE
Deletion of chromosome 11q predicts response to anthracycline-based chemotherapy in early breast cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Despite recent consensus on eligibility of adjuvant systemic therapy in lymph-node negative breast cancer (NNBC) patients based on clinico-pathological criteria, specific biological markers are needed to predict sensitivity to the different therapeutic options. We examined the feasibility of developing a genomic predictor of chemotherapy response and recurrence risk in 185 patients with NNBC using assembled arrays containing 2,460 BAC clones for scanning the genome for DNA copy number changes. After surgery, 90 patients received anthracycline-based chemotherapy whereas ninety-five did not. Tamoxifen was administered to patients with hormone-receptor positive tumors. Association of genomic and clinico-pathological data and outcome was computed using Cox proportional hazard models and multiple testing adjustment procedures. Analysis of NNBC genomes revealed a common genomic signature. Specific DNA copy number aberrations were associated with hormonal receptor status, but not with other clinico-pathological parameters. In patients treated with chemotherapy, none of the genomic changes was significantly correlated with recurrence. In patients not receiving chemotherapy, deletion of eight BAC clones clustered to chromosome 11q was independently associated with relapse (DFS at 10 years±SE, 40±14% vs. 86±6%;p < 00001). The 54 patients with deletion of 11q (29%) did not present more aggressive clinical-pathological features than those without 11q loss. The adverse influence of 11q deletion in clinical outcome was confirmed in an independent validation series of 88 NNBC patients. Our data suggest that NNBC patients with 11q deletion may benefit from anthracycline-based chemotherapy despite other clinical, pathological or genetic features. However, these initial findings should be evaluated in randomized clinical trials. Keywords: CGH, breast cancer

