TITLE
The transcriptome of Kawasaki Disease arteritis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Kawasaki Disease (KD) is a childhood illness of suspected infectious etiology that causes medium-sized muscular arteritis, most critically affecting the coronary arteries. No single diagnostic test exists, hampering early diagnosis and treatment. Approximately 25% of untreated patients develop coronary artery disease, and children who are treated with intravenous gammaglobulin but do not respond are also at high risk. Subacute/chronic arteritis and luminal myofibroblastic proliferation are the pathologic processes occurring in KD CA after the second week of illness, when neutrophilic necrotizing arteritis has subsided. The specific dysregulated immune pathways contributing to subacute/chronic arteritis have been unknown, hampering the development of effective immunomodulatory therapies for patients not responding to intravenous gammaglobulin therapy. Methods and Results: Deep RNA sequencing was performed on KD (n=8) and childhood control (n=7) coronary artery tissues, revealing 1074 differentially expressed mRNAs. Molecular pathways involving T helper cell, cytotoxic T lymphocyte, dendritic cells, and antigen presentation were the most significantly dysregulated. There was significant upregulation of immunoglobulin and type I interferon-stimulated genes.  80 upregulated extracellular genes encoding secreted proteins are candidate biomarkers of KD arteritis. Conclusions: The immune transcriptional profile in KD coronary artery tissues is primarily T helper and cytotoxic lymphocyte-mediated, and has features of an antiviral immune response such as type I interferon-stimulated gene expression. This first report of the KD coronary artery transcriptome identifies specific dysregulated immune response pathways that can inform the development of new therapies for and biomarkers of KD arteritis, and provide direction for future etiologic studies.

DESIGN
Primary analysis: 8 KD coronary arteries versus 7 childhood control coronary arteries. Subanalysis 1: 4 untreated KD coronary arteries versus 7 childhood control coronary arteries and subanalysis 2: 4 treated KD coronary arteries versus 7 childhood control coronary arteries

