TITLE
Genetic Loci that Regulate Ectopic Calcification in Response to Knee Trauma in LG/J by SM/J Advanced Intercross Mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Ectopic calcification in synovial tissues is devastating to diarthrodial joints. While some forms of synovial ectopic calcification have genetically simple basis, most cases manifest as complex traits with environmental and multigenic components. The location of causal loci or the physiological processes affected by allelic variants is poorly understood. Here, we report on genetic susceptibility to ectopic calcification in the LG/J and SM/J advanced intercross mice. Using 347 mice in 98 full-sibships, destabilization of medial meniscus was performed to induce joint injury. We performed quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis to map calcification phenotypes to discrete genomic locations. To validate the functional significance of the selected QTL candidate genes, we compared mRNA expression between parental LG/J and SM/J inbred strains. Our findings showed that joint destabilization instigated ectopic calcifications as detected and quantified by micro-CT. Overall, we detected 20 QTLs affecting synovial and meniscus calcification phenotypes with 11 QTLs linked to synovial calcification. Functional and bioinformatic analyses of single nucleotide polymorphism identified functional classifications relevant to angiogenesis (Myo1e, Kif26b, Nprl3, Stab2, Fam105b), bone metabolism/calcification (Tle3, Tgfb2, Lipc, Nfe2l1, Ank, Fam105b), arthritis (Stab2, Tbx21, Map4k4, Hoxb9, Larp6, Col1a2, Adam10, Timp3, Nfe2l1, Trpm3), and ankylosing-spondylitis (Ank, Pon1, Il1r2, Tbkbp1) indicating that ectopic calcification involves multiple mechanisms. Furthermore, the expression of 11 candidate genes was significantly different between LG/J and SM/J. Correlation analysis showed that Aff3, Fam81a, Syn3, and Ank were correlated with synovial calcification. Our findings of multiple genetic loci affecting the phenotype suggest the involvement of multiple genes contributing to its pathogenesis.

DESIGN
We collected tissue lysates from the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections from mouse knee joints and analyzed the expression of several genes by Affymetrix QuantiGene Plex assay.

