TITLE
Identification of Copy Number Variants in Patients with Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome and Other Congenital Heart Defects

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) is a heterogeneous, lethal combination of congenital malformations that result in a heart unable to sustain systemic circulation. The genetic determinants of this disorder are largely unknown. Evidence of copy number variants (CNVs) contributing to the genetic etiology of HLHS and other congenital heart defects (CHDs) has been mounting. However, the functional effects of such CNVs have not been examined, particularly in cases where the variant of interest is found in only a single patient. Initially whole-genome SNP microarrays were employed to detect CNVs in two patient cohorts (N = 70 total) predominantly diagnosed with some form of nonsyndromic HLHS. We discovered 16 rare variants adjacent to or overlapping 20 genes associated with cardiovascular or premature lethality phenotypes in mouse knockout models. Fifteen of the 16 variants were identified in separate patients, suggestive of a private mutation model of disease. We evaluated the impact of selected variants on the expression of nine of these genes through quantitative PCR on cDNA derived from patient heart tissue. Four genes displayed significantly altered expression in patients with an overlapping or proximal CNV verses patients without such CNVs. Thus, rare and private genomic imbalances perturb transcription of genes affecting cardiogenesis in a subset of nonsyndromic HLHS patients. Some of these genes influence extracellular matrix structure, cardiac neural crest development, and coronary vascularization.

DESIGN
A total of 70 samples from CHD patients, mostly with nonsyndromic HLHS, yielded SNP genotypes and probe intensity ratios of sufficient quality for CNV identification. Two classes of CNV detection algorithms (HMM and CBS) were employed. After identification, concordant entries were subjected to selection criteria based on rarity and gene content, which produced putative candidate genes for follow-up experiments.

