TITLE
Integrated transcriptomic and histologic analysis of cholangiolar differentiation trait in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background & Aims: Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) is known to heterogeneous with diverse etiology, morphology, and clinical outcomes. Recently, cholangiolar differentiation of ICC has been suggested to associate with prognostic outcomes, however, its molecular patho-biological features and clinical significances were not evaluated extensively. Methods:Integrative analysis was performed using transcriptomic profiles (n=27) and tissue microarrays (n=142) from ICC specimens. Results:ICCs were classified into ICC with cholangiolar differentiation (ICC-CD, n=20) and ICC with bile duct differentiation (ICC-BD, n=122). ICC-CD showed favorable overall survival (OS) compared to ICC-BD (Hazard Ratio=0.38, P=0.020, log-rank test). Transcriptomic profiling of ICC-CD and ICC-BD revealed a cholangiolar differentiation signature (CD signature, n=794), which could predict prognostic outcomes of ICC in an independent data. Interestingly, the expression of CD signature demonstrated that the ICC-BD but not ICC-CD harbored pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) like expression trait, implying its cellular origin from multipotent biliary tree stem cells or the cells committed to differentiate into pancreatic lineage cells. The CD signature might be a key determinant for ICC heterogeneity indicating spectral continuum of cellular differentiation of ICC-CD → ICC-BD → PDAC. In addition, we identified four genes (i.e., CRP, CDH2, TFF1, and S100P) from integrated analysis of tissue microarrays and transcriptome profiles as prognostic as well as differential histologic markers for ICC-CD and ICC-BD. Strikingly, combined expression status of the four genes were more beneficial in predicting prognostic outcomes of ICC. Conclusions:Our integrative genomic-pathologic analysis could reveal new molecular and clinical significance of cholangiolar differentiation in association with PDAC-like expression traits, which might play pivotal roles in heterogeneous progression of ICC.

DESIGN
The analysis of gene expression profiling among cholangiocarcinoma samples

