TITLE
Cocaine-induced changes in the gene expression

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Several recent reports show that the cerebral cortex in humans and animals with altered expressions of Wnt/cadherin network-associate molecules display cytoarchitectural abnormalities reminiscent of cortical dysplasias seen in some (mouse-, rat-, and monkey-based) animal models of prenatal cocaine exposure. Therefore, we employed oligo microarrays followed by real-time RT-PCR to compare expressions of genes involved in Wnt and cadherin systems in the cerebral wall of 18-day-old (E18) fetuses from cocaine-treated (20 mg/kg cocaine, s.c., b.i.d., E8-18) and drug-naive (saline, s.c.) mice. The pregnant mice chronically treated with cocaine in the above-described manner represent one of the animal models producing offspring with widespread cortical dysplasias. Out of more than 150 relevant genes in the arrays, 32 were upregulated and 9 were downregulated in cocaine-exposed fetuses. The majority of these genes (30 out of 41) were similarly affected in the frontal and occipital regions of the cerebral wall. We also used Western immunoblotting to examine the ability of cocaine to regulate the protein levels of beta-catenin, the key functional component of both Wnt and cadherin systems. While the total cell levels of beta-catenin were increased throughout the cerebral wall of cocaine-exposed fetuses, its nuclear (gene-transcription driving) levels remained unaltered. This suggests a transcription-unrelated role for cocaine-induced upregulation of this protein. Overall, our findings point to an intriguing possibility that that cerebral cortical dysplasias observed in several animal models of prenatal cocaine exposure may be at least in part related to alterations in the Wnt/cadherin molecular network. It has been demonstrated that exposure to cocaine increases cell death in the fetal CNS. To examine the molecular mechanisms of this effect, we employed mouse oligo microarrays followed by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (real-time RT-PCR) to compare expressions of apoptosis-related genes in the cerebral wall of 18-day-old (E18) fetuses from cocaine-treated (20 mg/kg cocaine, s.c., b.i.d., E8th-E18th) and drug-naive (saline, s.c.) mice. Out of approximately 400 relevant genes in the arrays, 53 showed alterations in expression in cocaine-exposed fetuses. Upregulation was observed in 35 proapoptotic and 8 antiapoptotic genes; 4 proapoptotic and 6 antiapoptotic genes were down-regulated. The affected genes encode a wide range of apoptosis-related proteins, including death receptors (NTF-R1, NTF-R2, DR3, DR5, LTbeta-R, GITR, P57 TR-1) and their adaptor and regulatory proteins (MASGE-D1, TRAF-2, SIVA, MET, FLIP, FAIM, IAP1, ATFA), members of transcription regulatory pathways (JNK, NF-kappaB, P53), members of BCL-2 family of proteins (BID, BAD, BAX, BIK, NIP21, NIP3, NIX, BCL-2), DNA damage sensor (PARP-1), caspases and their substrates and regulatory proteins (caspases 8, 4, 9, and 3, ACINUS, CIDE-A, CIDE-B, GAS2), mitochondrially released factors (cytochrome c, AIF, PRG3), specific endoplasmic reticulum- and oxidative stress-associated factors (BACH2, ABL1, ALG2, CHOP), members of cell survival AKT and HSP70 pathways (PIK3GA, PTEN, HSP70, BAG1, BAG2), and others. This suggests that cocaine affects survival of developing cerebral cells via multiple apoptosis-regulating mechanisms. Keywords: Whole genome oligo microarray, Real time RT-PCR, gene expression analysis

