TITLE
Different Effects of Tofu (Soybean Curd) and Fish Oil in Serum Lipoproteins and Hepatic Gene Expressions of Rats

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Soybean and fish contains various active components that were reported to prevent cardiovasucular diseases. Epidemiological studies indicated that Asian eating patterns, consisting of daily seafood and/or soy consumption, confer protection against cardiovascular diseases. In this context, we expected that simultaneous intake of soybean and fish may be greatly beneficial in a manner different from the ingestion of the individual food. To understand the detailed mechanism for modulating the lipid metabolism by co-ingestion of a soy food (tofu) and fish oil, we investigated the global changes in hepatic mRNA expression in rats by using a microarray analysis. Generally, ingestion of tofu contributed to prevent the mRNA expressions involved in hepatic lipogenesis, whereas fish oil facilitated the mRNA expressions related to the degradation of hepatic fatty acids. In terms of mRNA expression, the interaction of two dietary factors was limited. The expression data was normalized and summarized by using SuperNORM data service (Skylight Biotech Inc.). Significance of expressional change among groups was tested by 2-way ANOVA on the normalized CEL data, which was deposited in a tab-separated ASCII text format. Principal components were identified on the summarized gene data.

DESIGN
Rats were divided into four groups each with similar average body weights and assigned experimental diets for 21 days as follows: casein and soybean oil diet (CS); casein and fish oil diet (CF); tofu and soybean oil diet (TS); tofu and fish oil diet (TF). Total protein and fat content of each diet was 200 and 150 g/kg, respectively. Soybean oil diets (CS and TS) contain 150 g/kg diet of soybean-derived fat (i.e. soybean oil and freeze-dried tofu), and 50 g/kg of fish oil was replaced with the same amount of soybean-derived fat for fish oil diets (CF and TF). Animals were allowed free access to food and water.

