TITLE
Mycobacterium tuberculosis transcriptome on various phases of dormancy in potassium-deficient model

ORGANISM
Mycobacterium tuberculosis

SUMMARY
Dormant Mycobacterium tuberculosis bacilli play important role in latent tuberculosis infection. Previously we have demonstrated that cultivation of M. tuberculosis in potassium-deficient media resulted in the generation of dormant ‘non-culturable’ cells. Addition of a moderate concentration of rifampicin enabled to kill a minor subpopulation of actively replicating bacilli and obtain a homogeneous ‘zero-CFU’ population of dormant cells characterized by total inability to produce colonies on solid media and by high potential to reactivate after reintroducing of potassium. An RNA-seq based transcriptome analysis of this dormant ‘zero-CFU’ population revealed a 30-50 fold decrease of the total level of mRNA in the cells, indicating global shift-down of gene expression level. The residual scarce protein-coding transcriptome of the dormant cells showed decreased abundance of mRNAs encoding ribosomal proteins and enzymes of TCA cycle and respiratory chain, and increased abundance of mRNAs encoding PE-PGRS proteins. Interestingly, the transcriptome of dormant cells showed little changes during several days of persistence. This stability of ‘dormant’ transcripts may reflect their readiness for translation upon resuscitation process. Transition of M. tuberculosis cells to dormancy was accompanied by the cleavage of 23S ribosomal RNA at a specific point, located outside the ribosome catalytic center. Another feature of the ‘dormant’ transcriptome was an increased abundance of non-coding transcripts. Enrichment of " dormant transcriptome " by small non-coding RNAs playing regulatory function in the cell probably indicates their role in transition to and maintenance of dormant ‘non-culturable’ state.

DESIGN
Twelve samples, representing Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv cells at various time points in the model of dormancy: " Log " , " DE " , " DM " and " DL " . Each of the the time points is represented by three independently sequenced biological replicates.

