TITLE
The expression of lncRNA in cow mammary glands infected with different pathogens

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
To identify the expression of lncRNA in cow mammary glands infected with different pathogens, we used our custom lncRNA gene chip to explore expression of lncRNA from three Chinese cows. Compared with the control individual, a total of 629 and 139 lncRNAs showed significant different expression in mammary gland infected with S. aureus, and S. uberis, respectively. In addition, we found 3610, and 720 pairs of lincRNA/proteinencoding genes showing a highly significant correlated expression in mammary gland infected with S. aureus and S. uberis, respectively. Else, 309 and 98 pairs of lincRNA/proteinencoding genes showing a highly significant cis-regulation in mammary gland infected with S. aureus and S. uberis, respectively. Some of the lincRNAs expressed in mammary gland are located within quantitative trait loci for mastitis resistance. Our study first provides a glimpse into the lncRNA content of bovine mammary gland and will facilitate future experimental studies to unravel the function of these molecules. It may prove useful to elucidate their effects on mechanisms underlying the genetic variability of mastitis resistance.

DESIGN
Three primiparous Holstein cows in mid-lactation were used for this study .At the beginning of the study, these cows were clinically healthy for > 2 consecutive weeks based on composite milk SCC < 200,000 cells/mL and having no clinical signs of mastitis or any other disease during early lactation. A1 as control, B3 was infected with a 5 mL suspension of 1000000 CFU/ml S. aureus (ATCC29213),C3 was infected with S. uberis.  Systemic and local inflammatory indicators were used to monitor the clinical response to intramammary challenge. At 24 h post-inoculation, and before peak clinical signs, the mammary gland tissues both the infected and un-infected quarters were sampled using surgical operation by experienced veterinarian.

