TITLE
Gene expression data of diagnostic childhood T-ALL samples and human thymocytes

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Lymphotoxin-mediated activation of the lymphotoxin-β receptor (LTβR) has been implicated in several physiological and pathological processes, including lymphoid organ development, T-cell maturation, and solid and hematopoietic malignancies. Its role in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) or other T-cell malignancies has remained however to be investigated. Here we show that the genes encoding lymphotoxin (LT)-α and LTβ were expressed in T-ALL patient samples, more abundantly in the TAL/LMO molecular subtype, and in the TEL-JAK2 mouse model of cortical/mature T-ALL. Surface LTα1β2 protein was detected in primary mouse T-ALL cells, but only upon phorbol ester stimulation or absence of microenvironmental LTβR interaction. Indeed, in contrast to leukemic cells collected from transplanted Ltbr–/– mice or from co-cultures with Ltbr–/– mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF), those collected from Ltbr+/+ mice or from Ltbr+/+ MEF co-cultures presented no surface LT expression. Supporting the notion that LT signaling plays a role in T-ALL, inactivation of the Ltbr gene in mice resulted in a statistically significant delay in TEL-JAK2-induced leukemia onset. Expression of the Lta and Ltb genes was found to be increased at the early asymtptomatic stages of TEL-JAK2 T-ALL, when only low proportions of malignant thymocytes are present in normal sized thymus. Interestingly, young asymptomatic TEL-JAK2;Ltbr–/– mice presented significantly less leukemic thymocytes than TEL-JAK2;Ltbr+/+ mice. Together, these data indicate that early lymphotoxin expression by T-ALL cells activates LTβR signaling in thymic stromal cells, thus promoting leukemogenesis.

DESIGN
Primary T-ALL samples were obtained at diagnosis from bone marrow and/or peripheral blood with high leukemia involvement ( > 85%), and enriched by density centrifugation over Ficoll-Paque (GE Healthcare). Microarray analysis were performed on samples from patients with newly diagnosed T-ALL accrued from 2000 to 2013 at Centro Infantil Boldrini, Campinas, Brazil. Thymic samples, obtained from children undergoing cardiac surgery, were gently minced in culture medium and subsequently subjected to density centrifugation.

