TITLE
Vitamin A and arachidonic acid altered the skeletal mineralization in Atlantic cod larvae (Gadus morhua) without any interactions on the transcriptional level

ORGANISM
Gadus morhua

SUMMARY
The main object of this study was to evaluate the impact of different levels of vitamin A (VA) and arachidonic acid (ARA) in relation to eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) on mineralization and gene expression in Atlantic cod larvae (Gadus morhua). A two-way factorial design was used to identify possible interactions between the nutrients. First-feeding larvae were fed enriched rotifers from start-feeding until 29 days post hatch (dph). Larvae in four tanks were fed one of the following diets: control (EPA/ARA ratio: 15.8, 0.9 µg VA g-1 wet wt.), control+VA (EPA/ARA ratio: 15.8, 7.8 µg VA g-1 wet wt.), High ARA (EPA/ARA ratio: 0.9, 1.5 µg VA g-1 wet wt.) or High ARA +VA (EPA/ARA ratio: 0.9, 12.0 µg VA g-1 wet wt.). There was no difference in survival (33-40%) between the groups. Larvae fed High ARA+VA were shorter at 29 dph. The larvae fed High ARA+VA had significantly less mineralized bones, showing significant interaction effects between VA and ARA.  Although transcriptomic analysis using a custom-made microarray did not reveal any interaction effects, it was found that high ARA diets altered the transcription of more genes than control +VA diets. Furthermore, blgap1 , blgap2 and col10a1 were all down-regulated in larvae fed High ARA-diets and to a lesser extent by Control +VA diet. Lower expression in the High ARA+VA diets compared to ARA and VA diets indicated an additive effect on mineralization. In conclusion, this study showed that the dietary increase in ARA and VA altered the skeletal metabolism during larval A. cod development, most likely through signaling pathways specific for each nutrient rather than an interaction.  The present study also demonstrates that VA could affect the larval response to ARA, even within the accepted non-toxic/non-deficient range.

DESIGN
Four different experimental groups in a two way factorial design were analyzed with different combination of arachidonic acid enrichement (ARA) and vitamin A (VA) supplement. Two oil mixtures were made, named Control and High ARA. Control contained 90% EPAX4510 and 10% EPAX5010, while High ARA contained 65% Cargill ARA oil, 5% EPAX4510 and 30%EPAX5010. The mixtures were then divided in two fractions. VA in the form of retinylpalmitate (Sigma-Aldrich, Oslo, Norway) was added to one fraction from each oil mixture (5 g retinylpalmitate L-1 oil). This gave four different mixtures, namely Control, Control+VA, High ARA and High ARA+VA. These mixtrures were used to enriched rotifers which in turn were subsequently fed to Atlantic cod larvae from 4 days post hatch (dph) to 29 dph. Four tanks per experimental group was used in the factorial design.  Atlantic cod larvae were sampled at 17 dph and 29 dph for microarray analysis. RNA from pooled whole animals were reverse transcribed and Cy3-labled and hybridized.

