TITLE
Generation of clinical grade CD19-specific CAR-modified CD8+ memory stem cells for the treatment of B-cell malignancies

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Long-lived, self-renewing, multipotent T memory stem cells (TSCM) can trigger profound and sustained tumor regression but their rareness poses a major hurdle to their clinical application. Presently, clinically compliant procedures to generate relevant numbers of this T cell population are undefined. Here, we provide a strategy for deriving large numbers of clinical grade tumor-redirected TSCM cells starting from naïve precursors. CD8+CD62L+CD45RA+ naïve T cells enriched by streptamer-based serial positive selection were activated by CD3/CD28 engagement in the presence of IL-7, IL-21 and the glycogen synthase-3β inhibitor TWS119, and genetically engineered to express a CD19-specific chimeric antigen receptor (CD19-CAR). These conditions allowed for the generation of CD19-CAR modified TSCM cells that were phenotypically, functionally and transcriptomically equivalent to their naturally occurring counterpart. Compared with T cell products currently under clinical investigation, CD19-CAR modified TSCM cells exhibit enhanced metabolic fitness, persistence and anti-tumor activity against systemic acute lymphoblastic leukemia xenografts. Based on these findings, we have initiated a phase 1 clinical study to evaluate the activity of CD19-CAR modified TSCM in patients with B-cell malignancies refractory to prior allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

DESIGN
Three healthy human blood donors provided lymphocyte-enriched apheresis blood for this study after informed consent. From all samples, total RNA was isolated using an miRNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen), processed by Ambion’s WT expression kit, fragmented and labeled with a WT Terminal Labeling Kit (Affymetrix), hybridized to WT Human Gene 1.0 ST arrays (Affymetrix) and stained on a Genechip Fluidics Station 450 (Affymetrix), all according to the respective manufacturer's instructions. Samples represent exon-level and gene-level analyses.

