TITLE
Host transcriptional response to influenza and other acute respiratory viral infections – a prospective cohort study

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The purpose of the study was to assess the patterns of global gene expression in peripheral blood cells and uncover the complex  dynamics of host response to ARIs such as pandemic H1N1. To understand the molecular bases and network orchestration of host responses, we prospectively enrolled 1610 healthy adults in the fall of 2009 and 2010, followed the subjects with influenza-like illness (N=133) for 3 weeks, and examined changes in their peripheral blood gene expression. We discovered distinct phases of the host response spanning 6 days after infection, and identified genes that differentiate influenza from non-influenza virus infection. We examined pre- and post-infection anti-influenza antibody titers defining novel gene expression correlates.

DESIGN
Healthy adults were invited to enroll to be followed for acute respiratory illness (ARI) through two consecutive influenza seasons 2009-2010 and 2010-2011. After subjects provided consent, baseline blood specimens were obtained during enrollment. Subjects were given thermometers and instructions to call and report for evaluation within 48 hours of ARI onset. Those persons who had a new ARI were seen within 48 hours of onset (day 0) and 2, 4, and 6 days later for repeat evaluation, blood specimen collections, and medical care (including the antiviral zanamivir if indicated) and 21 days later for collection of convalescent specimens. Nasal wash samples were collected for virus detection by RT-PCR on day 0 and day 2. Surveillance for influenza was terminated after 5.5 months; all subjects were asked to return for specimen collection and to provide a medical and ARI history in spring of next year. Serum specimens obtained at baseline, day 0 and day 21 visits for illnesses, and the terminal visit were tested simultaneously using hemagglutination-inhibition (HAI) antibody assay for Influenza H1N1, H3N2, and Influenza B strains. Peripheral blood RNA (PaxGene) obtained from blood specimens at each visit were analyzed using Illumina Human HT-12 v4. The study was repeated 2010-2011. A total of 880 arrays, corresponding to 133 individuals, passed quality control and are included in this data set.

