TITLE
Dual Specificity Phosphatase 1 and Tristetraprolin cooperate to regulate macrophage responses to LPS

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) p38 pathway is reported to regulate macrophage responses to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) at least partly via the phosphorylation of the mRNA-destabilizing factor tristetraprolin (TTP). LPS-activated MAPK p38 phosphorylates and activates the downstream kinase MAPK-activated protein kinase 2 (MK2), which then phosphorylates serines 52 and 178 of TTP, resulting in loss of mRNA-destabilizing activity. As a consequence, mRNAs that contain binding sites for TTP are stabilized in a manner that is acutely sensitive to the activity of the MAPK p38 pathway. Dual specificity phosphatase 1 (DUSP1) dephosphorylates and inactivates MAPK p38. Dusp1-/- macrophages overexpress a number of pro-inflammatory mediators, but their genome-wide responses to LPS have not yet been described in detail. Dusp1-/- mice are exceptionally sensitive to a wide variety of inflammatory challenges, including experimental models of endotoxemia or sepsis. It has been suggested (but not yet proven) that DUSP1 controls the inflammatory response of macrophages in part via the regulation of MAPK p38 activity and TTP phosphorylation status. We generated a mouse knock-in strain, in which codons 52 and 178 of the endogenous Zfp36 gene (which encodes TTP) were mutated to alanine codons. The mutation gives rise to a constitutively active form of TTP, which cannot be inactivated via the p38 MAPK pathway. The Zfp36aa/aa strain was back-crossed against C57/BL6 for > 10 generations. We also generated a double-targeted strain in which the Zfp36 mutation was combined with disruption of the Dusp1 gene. This expression array describes LPS responses of primary mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages of four genotypes, and closely matched genetic background: wild type (Dusp1+/+ : Zfp36+/+); TTP mutant (Zfp36aa/aa); DUSP1 knock out (Dusp1-/-); and double targeted (Dusp1-/- : Zfp36aa/aa). The data provide a comprehensive picture of the impact of Dusp1 deletion or TTP mutation on the responses of primary macrophages to LPS. They also demonstrate that the excessive inflammatory responses of Dusp1-/- macrophages are largely a consequence of the phosphorylation and inactivation of TTP.

DESIGN
Genome wide expression profiles of wild type, Dusp1-/-, Zfp36aa/aa and Dusp1-/-/Zfp36aa/aa M-CSF derived macrophages, stimulated with LPS for 1 or 4 hours

