TITLE
Synergism of calcium sensing receptor and vitamin D receptor mediated signaling in epidermal differentiation [VDR KO]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Calcium and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D3), through the actions of their respective receptors, the Ca2+-sensing receptor (CaSR) and the vitamin D receptor (VDR), potentiate keratinocyte differentiation. VDR regulates epidermal keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation by modulating gene transcription, whereas the CaSR, a member of the family C G-protein coupled receptor, calcium mobilizes intracellular calcium and induces the formation of cell-cell junctions. 1,25D3 augments the sensitivity of the prodifferentiating actions of calcium by increasing the expression of CaSR. CaSR- and VDR-deficient keratinocytes share common characteristics such as abnormal intercellular adhesion and sphigolipid metabolism. Both CaSR and VDR are abundantly expressed in epidermal stem cell populations including CD34 expressing bulge keratinocytes in hair follicles and basal cells in interfollicular epidermis. To delineate the role of CaSR- and VDR-dependent pathways in regulating epidermal development and functions in physiological state, we generated conditional CaSR-null and VDR-null mice, where Casr and VDR gene was removed from keratinocytes. Keratinocyte-specific CaSR-null and VDR-null mice manifest distinct phenotypes. CaSR-null mice display defective epidermal permeability barrier function due to aberrant keratinocyte differentiation. VDR-null mice develop alopecia after completing the first hair follicle cycling. Concurrent ablation of CaSR and VDR genes in keratinocytes delays rate of wound repair and increases incidence of skin tumor formation to a greater extent than deletion of the CaSR or VDR alone, indicative of synergistic effects of calcium and 1,25D3 signaling. Gene expression profiles and subsequent pathway analysis on the epidermis derived from 5-day-old neonates revealed that ablation of CaSR or VDR increased expression of genes associated with cancer progression and metastasis. Deletion of VDR markedly inhibited signaling pathways that regulate hair development. Furthermore, concurrent ablation of CaSR and VDR significantly suppressed calcium, VDR, Wnt/b-catenin signaling, as well as epithelial adherence junction signaling to maintain appropriate keratinocyte adhesion. These results indicated the interplay of calcium/CaSR and 1,25D3/VDR signaling in keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation, and their importance in maintaining normal epidermal adhesion and functions.

DESIGN
n=3 CON and KO (each sample contain RNA isolated from neonatal epidermis separated from 3 mice)

