TITLE
Treatment effects of trastuzumab and TDM-1 in a murine model of breast cancer brain metastasis

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Central nervous system (CNS) metastases represent a major problem in the treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer due to the disappointing efficacy of HER2-targeted therapies in the brain microenvironment. The antibody-drug conjugate ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) has shown efficacy in trastuzumab-resistant systemic breast cancer. Here, we tested the hypothesis that T-DM1 could overcome trastuzumab resistance in preclinical models of brain metastases. Methods: We treated mice bearing BT474 or MDA-MB-361 tumors in the CNS (N=9-11 per group), or cancer cells grown in organotypic brain slice cultures with trastuzumab or T-DM1 at equivalent or equipotent doses. Using intravital imaging, molecular techniques and histological analysis we determined tumor growth, mouse survival, cancer cell apoptosis and proliferation, tumor drug distribution, and HER2 signaling. All statistical tests were two-sided. Results: T-DM1 significantly delayed the growth of HER2-positive breast cancer brain metastases compared to trastuzumab. These findings were consistent between HER2-driven and PI3K-driven tumors. The activity of T-DM1 resulted in a striking survival benefit (median survival for BT474 tumors: 28d for trastuzumab vs 112d for T-DM1, HR=6.2, 95% CI=6.1 to 85.84; P < .001). No difference in drug distribution and HER2-signaling was revealed between the two groups. However, T-DM1 led to a significant increase in tumor cell apoptosis (One-way ANOVA for ApopTag, p < .001), which was associated  with mitotic catastrophe. Conclusions: T-DM1 can overcome resistance to trastuzumab therapy in HER2-driven and PI3K-driven breast cancer brain lesions due to the cytotoxicity of the DM1 component. Clinical investigation of T-DM1 for patients with CNS metastases from HER2-positive breast cancer is warranted.

DESIGN
Comparison of trastuzumab (n=4) and TDM-1 (n=4) treated BT-474 human breast carcinoma cells growing in murine brain

