TITLE
Active FOXO1 is a Key Determinant of Isoform-Specific Progesterone Receptor Transactivation and Senescence Programming

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The progesterone receptor specific gene targets were investigated in ovarian and breast cancer cell lines where FOXO1 was found to be a primary factor that cooperates with PR to activate cellular senescence genes (including p21) specifically in ovarian cells. ABSTRACT: Progesterone promotes differentiation coupled to proliferation and pro-survival in the breast, but inhibits estrogen-driven growth in the reproductive tract and ovaries. Herein, it is demonstrated, using progesterone receptor (PR) isoform-specific ovarian cancer model systems, that PR-A and PR-B promote distinct gene expression profiles that differ from PR-driven genes in breast cancer cells. In ovarian cancer models, PR-A primarily regulates genes independently of progestin, while PR-B is the dominant ligand-dependent isoform. Notably, FOXO1 and the PR/FOXO1 target-gene p21 (CDKN1A) are repressed by PR-A, but induced by PR-B. In the presence of progestin, PR-B, but not PR-A, robustly induced cellular senescence via FOXO1-dependent induction of p21 and p15 (CDKN2B). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays performed on PR-isoform specific cells demonstrated that while each isoform is recruited to the same PRE-containing region of the p21 promoter in response to progestin, only PR-B elicits active chromatin marks. Overexpression of constitutively active FOXO1 in PR-A-expressing cells conferred robust ligand-dependent upregulation of the PR-B target genes GZMA, IGFBP1, and p21, and induced cellular senescence. In the presence of endogenous active FOXO1, PR-A was phosphorylated on Ser294 and transactivated PR-B at PR-B target genes; these events were blocked by the FOXO1 inhibitor (AS1842856). PR isoform-specific regulation of the FOXO1/p21 axis recapitulated in human primary ovarian tumor explants treated with progestin; loss of progestin sensitivity correlated with high AKT activity. IMPLICATIONS: This study indicates FOXO1 as a critical component for progesterone signaling to promote cellular senescence and reveals a novel mechanism for transcription factor control of hormone sensitivity.

DESIGN
The study contains 6 different sample groups measured in triplicate, for a total of 18 individual samples (18 arrays). From parental T47D-Y human breast cancer cell lines (that is a naturally occurring PR-null variant of T47D cells), we created two stable clones expressing either (1) the wild type progesterone receptor isoform A (pSG5-PR-A), or (2) the wild type progesterone receptor isoform B (pSG5-PR-B). These three cell lines were treated with either (1) vehicle control (ethanol) or (2) R5020 10e-8 M for 24 hours before total RNA harvest. Thus, the experiment contains three cell lines and two treatments (6 sample groups), treated and analyzed in triplicate (18 microarrays). Standard Illumina HumanHT-12 V4.0 chip controls were used during hybridization.

