TITLE
Gene expression signatures of HO-1 in BeWo cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Heme Oxygenase-1 (HO-1) is expressed in many cancers and  influences the growth, survivall and metastasis of tumors, however, the molecular mechanisms remains largely unknown. To identify a common mechanism of action of HO-1 in cancer, we studied the global effect of HO-1 on the transcriptome of multiple tumors. Genome-wide expression profiling of HO-1 expressing versus HO-1 silenced cancer cells and a further data mining analysis of the preexisting expression database of 190 human tumors of 14 cancer types led us to identify 14 genes, the expression of which correlated firmly and universally with that of HO-1 (P < 0.001). These genes included regulators of cell plasticity and extracellular matrix remodeling (MMP2, ADAM8, TGFβ1, BGN, COL21A1, PXDN), signaling (CRIP2, MICB), amino acid transport and glycosylation (SLC7A1 and ST3GAL2), estrogen and phospholipid biosynthesis (AGPAT2 and HSD17B1), protein stabilization (IFI30) and phosphorylation (ALPPL2). PXDN, one of the genes being co-expressed with HO-1, was selected for further analysis. Immunofluorescence and western blotting confirmed positive correlation of PXDN with HO-1 levels in BeWo cancer cells as well as co-localization in invasive extravillous trophoblast cells of first trimester placenta. Loss of HO-1 in BeWo cells correlated with reduced cell adhesion to Collagen type I, Fibronectin and Laminin. The adhesion-promoting effects of HO-1 were dependent on PXDN expression, as loss of PXDN in HO-1 expressing BeWo cells led to reduced cell attachment to Laminin and Fibronectin coated wells.

DESIGN
We used gene expression profiling to determine the genome-wide effect of HO-1 on the transcriptome of BeWo trophoblast cells. We specifically selected BeWo  cells for our studies because these cells express HO-1 naturally. We knocked down endogenous HO-1 in BeWo cells using retroviral transduction with a micro-RNA adapted retroviral vector targeting human HO-1 sequence. RNA isolated from control (LMP) or miHO1 infected (miHO-1) cells was labeled and hybridized to human genome-wide gene level 1.0 ST arrays

