TITLE
Profiling of H3K9me3 levels predicts Transcription Factor Activity and Survival in Acute Myeloid Leukemia

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) is commonly associated with alterations in transcription factors due to altered expression or gene mutations. These changes might induce leukemia specific patterns of histone modifications. We used ChIP-Chip to analyze histone H3 Lysine 9 trimethylation (H3K9me3) patterns in primary AML (n=108), ALL (n=28), CD34+ cells (n=21) and white blood cells (n=15) specimens. Hundreds of promoter regions in AML showed significant alterations in H3K9me3 levels. H3K9me3 deregulation in AML occurred preferentially as a decrease in H3K9me3 levels at core promoter regions. The altered genomic regions showed an overrepresentation of cis-binding sites for ets and c-AMP response elements (CREs) for transcription factors of the CREB/CREM/ATF1 family. The decrease in H3K9me3 levels at CREs was associated with increased CRE-driven promoter activity in AML blasts in vivo. AML specific H3K9me3 patterns were not associated with known cytogenetic abnormalities. But a signature derived from H3K9me3 patterns predicted event free survival in AML patients. Combination of the H3K9me3 signature with established clinical prognostic markers outperformed prognosis prediction based on clinical parameters alone. These findings demonstrate widespread changes of H3K9me3 levels at gene promoters in AML. Signatures of histone modification patterns are associated with patient prognosis in AML.

DESIGN
Blasts from patients with AML and ALL were obtained at the time of diagnosis (in a few cases at first relapse). Two batches of experiments were performed and analyzed separately. One group of specimens contained ALL (n=28) and AML samples (n=38) and the other one contained AML samples (n=70) and CD34+ progenitor cells (n=21) and white blood cells (n=15) as controls. Immunoprecipitations were performed for anti-H3K9me3. Chromatin-IPs were amplified using ligation mediated PCR and labeled using Cy3 coupled to incorporated amino-allyl-UTP. Common reference DNA consisting of a mixture of genomic DNA from AML patients was prepared, amplified and labeled in a similar way with Cy5.

