TITLE
Hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus response to hydrogen peroxide

ORGANISM
Pyrococcus furiosus DSM 3638

SUMMARY
Oxidative Stress Protection and the Repair Response To Hydrogen Peroxide in the Hyperthermophilic Archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus Pyrococcus furiosus is a shallow marine, anaerobic archaeon that grows optimally at 100°C. Addition of H2O2 (0.5 mM) to a growing culture resulted in cessation of growth with a 2 hour lag before normal growth resumed. Whole genome transcriptional profiling revealed that the main response occurs within 30 min of peroxide addition, with the up-regulation of 62 open reading frames (ORFs), 36 of which are part of 10 potential operons.  More than half of the up-regulated ORFs are of unknown function while some others encode proteins that are involved potentially in sequestering iron and sulfide, in DNA repair and in generating NADPH. This response is thought to involve primarily damage repair rather than protection, since cultures exposed to sub-toxic levels of H2O2 were not more resistant to the subsequent addition of H2O2 (0.5 – 5.0 mM). Consequently, there is little if any induced protective response to peroxide, rather, the organism maintains a constitutive protective mechanism involving high levels of oxidoreductase-type enzymes such as superoxide reductase, rubrerythrin and alkyl hydroperoxide reductase I.  The related hyperthermophiles P. woesei and Thermococcus kodakaraensis were more sensitive to peroxide than P. furiosus, apparently due to the lack of several of its peroxide-responsive ORFs.

DESIGN
Pyrococcus furiosus (DSM 3638) was grown at 95°C in a 20-liter fermentor using maltose as the carbon and energy source. An exponential-phase culture of P. furiosus that had undergone three successive transfers in the experimental medium was used to inoculate the 20-liter fermentor. The culture was shocked with 0.5 mM of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) when cell density was in mid-exponential phase (~ 5.0 ´ 107 cells/ml, as determined by direct microscopic cell count). To obtain RNA for microarray and for quantitative PCR (QPCR) analyses, samples (2 liter) were rapidly removed from the fermentor and cooled to 4°C. Total RNA was extracted using acid-phenol and stored at -80°C until needed.  A total of 3 biological replicates in triplicate (3 copies on the same slide) was used in the data set.

