TITLE
Immunoregulatory actions of T cell PPAR g at the colonic mucosa

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
BACKGROUND: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor g (PPAR g) is a nuclear receptor whose activation has been shown to modulate macrophage and epithelial cell-mediated inflammation.  The objective of this study was to use a systems approach for investigating the mechanism by which the deletion of PPAR g in T cells modulates the severity of dextran-sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced colitis, immune cell distribution and global gene expression. METHODS: Wild-type (WT) or PPAR g flfl; CD4 Cre+ (CD4cre) mice in a C57BL/6 background were challenged with 2.5% DSS in their drinking water for 0, 2, or 7 days.  Mice were scored on disease severity both clinically and histopathologically. Flow cytometry was used to assess lymphocyte and macrophage populations in the blood, spleen, and mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN).  Global gene expression in colonic mucosa was profiled using Affymetrix microarrays. RESULTS: Both disease severity and inflammation-related body weight loss were accelerated by the deficiency of PPAR g in T cells.  Examination of colon histopathology revealed significantly greater epithelial erosion, leukocyte infiltration, and mucosal thickening in the CD4cre mice on day 7.  CD4cre mice had more CD8+ T cells than wt mice and fewer CD4+FoxP3+ regulatory T cells (Treg) and IL10+CD4+ T cells in blood and MLN, respectively.  Transcriptomic profiling revealed around 3000 genes being transcriptionally altered as a result of DSS challenge in CD4cre mice. These included up-regulated adhesion molecules on day 7 and proinflammatory cytokines interleukin-6 (IL-6) and IL-1b, and suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS-3) mRNA expression. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that T cell PPAR g down-regulates inflammation during DSS colitis by inhibiting colonic expression of inflammatory mediators and increasing MLN Treg.

DESIGN
Colonic mucosa from wt and CD4cre mice were sampled at 0 (no DSS), 2, and 7 days of DSS-induced experimental colitis

