TITLE
Gene expression profiles of myeloma cells interacting with bone marrow stromal cells in vitro

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Conventional anti-cancer drug screening is typically performed in the absence of accessory cells (e.g. stromal cells) of the tumor microenvironment, which can profoundly alter anti-tumor drug activity. To address this major limitation, we have developed assays (e.g. the tumor cell-specific in vitro bioluminescence imaging (CS-BLI) assay) to selectively quantify tumor cell viability, in presence vs. absence of non-malignant stromal cells or drug treatment. These assays have allowed us to identify that neoplastic cells from diverse malignancies exhibit stroma-induced resistance to different anti-tumor agents. In this analysis, we evaluated the molecular changes triggered in myeloma cells by their in vitro interaction with stromal cells. The transcriptional profile of 3 human multiple myeloma (MM) cell lines (MM.1S, MM.1R, INA-6) co-cultured with stromal cells vs. when cultured alone was characterized by oligonucleotide microarray analysis, using the human U133 plus 2.0 Affymetrix GeneChip.

DESIGN
Three human multiple myeloma (MM) cell lines (MM.1S, MM.1R, INA-6) stably expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) were cultured in vitro for 24hrs either alone or in the presence of the human bone marrow stromal cell line HS-5. Fluorescence activated cell sorting was used to separate the GFP+ MM cells from GFP- stromal cells. The gene expression profiles of MM cells after their co-culture with stromal cells were compared with the profiles of MM cells cultured alone, according to previously described protocols for total RNA extraction and purification; cDNA synthesis; production of biotin-labeled cRNA; hybridization of cRNA with U133plus2.0 Affymetrix gene chips; and scanning of image output files. Scanned image output files were analyzed using DNA-Chip Analyzer (dChip) (www.dchip.org), including conversion to DCP files, normalization and modeling, and averaging of duplicate chips according to standard parameters recommended by the software. For each cell line, the gene expression profile in the presence of stomal cells was compared to the profile of the same cell line cultured in the absence of stromal cells. Technical replicates for each condition were analyzed (total of 12 gene expression profiles).

