TITLE
Comparative transcriptome analysis of weaned pigs in response to different dietary starch sources displaying metabolic changes of lipids in liver

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
Diets rich in carbohydrates not only lead to obesity but also contribute to the liver metabolic diseases. Starch is the major energy source of the daily diet. However, little is known about the metabolic changes due to the intake of different dietary starches. Our aim was to assess the overall metabolic changes at the transcriptome level. Animal model was used, and a total of 16 weaned pigs were randomly allotted to two experimental diets containing either of cassava starch (CS) or maize starch (MS) during 21 days. At the end of the trial, liver tissues were sampled and used for analysis of digestive enzymes, metabolites and transcriptomes. The growth performance was not affected by dietary starch sources. However, CS-feeding significantly increased the serum insulin and cholesterol concentrations (P < 0.05). The liver triglyceride and cholesterol content were both elevated by CS-feeding (P < 0.05). Microarray analysis led to the identification of 648 genes differentially expressed in liver (P < 0.05). The CS-feeding activated the transcription of lipogenic genes such as HMGR and FASN, but decreased the expression of lipolytic genes such as ACOX1, PPARA and FBP. The microarray results correlated well with the measurements of several key enzymes involved in hepatic lipid metabolisms. These results suggested that dietary starch source alters hepatic transcriptome in weaned pigs. The slowly digestible starch (i.e. MS) seemed to be more healthful for mammals as the dietary energy supplier by transcriptional down-regulation of lipogenesis and steroidogenesis.

DESIGN
Sixteen weaned pigs (Duroc×Landrace×Yorkshire) with an average initial body weight of 7.37±0.25 kg were selected and randomly allotted to two dietary treatments (either Cassava or maize starch as the energy source) for 21 d. At the end of the trial, the liver tissue were collected for transcriptome analysis using Agilent porcine microarrays.

