TITLE
Gene Expression Profiling Reveals a Massive, Aneuploidy-Dependent Transcriptional Deregulation and Distinct Differences between Lymph Node–Negative and Lymph Node–Positive Colon Carcinomas

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
To characterize patterns of global transcriptional deregulation in primary colon carcinomas, we did gene expression profiling of 73 tumors [Unio Internationale Contra Cancrum stage II (n = 33) and stage III (n = 40)] using oligonucleotide microarrays. For 30 of the tumors, expression profiles were compared with those from matched normal mucosa samples. We identified a set of 1,950 genes with highly significant deregulation between tumors and mucosa samples (P < 1e-7). A significant proportion of these genes mapped to chromosome 20 (P = 0.01). Seventeen genes had a > 5-fold average expression difference between normal colon mucosa and carcinomas, including up-regulation of MYC and of HMGA1, a putative oncogene. Furthermore, we identified 68 genes that were significantly differentially expressed between lymph node-negative and lymph node-positive tumors (P < 0.001), the functional annotation of which revealed a preponderance of genes that play a role in cellular immune response and surveillance. The microarray-derived gene expression levels of 20 deregulated genes were validated using quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR in > 40 tumor and normal mucosa samples with good concor- dance between the techniques. Finally, we established a relationship between specific genomic imbalances, which were mapped for 32 of the analyzed colon tumors by comparative genomic hybridization, and alterations of global transcriptional activity. Previously, we had conducted a similar analysis of primary rectal carcinomas. The systematic comparison of colon and rectal carcinomas revealed a signif- icant overlap of genomic imbalances and transcriptional deregulation, including activation of the Wnt/B-catenin signaling cascade, suggesting similar pathogenic pathways. [Cancer Res 2007;67(1):41-56]

DESIGN
Samples of tumor and/or mucosa from a total of 65 colon cancer patients, i.e. 103 arrays

