TITLE
Inhibition of transglutaminase 2 mitigates transcriptional dysregulation in models of Huntington disease

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Huntington Disease (HD) is a dominantly inherited, relentlessly progressive neurodegenerative disease. Caused by a polyglutamine expansion in the mutant huntingtin protein (mhtt), HD pathogenesis impairs function in the cerebral cortex and in medium spiny neurons of the striatum  and involves transcriptional dysregulation of a number of genes. Of these genes, silencing of  genes related to mitochondrial function is believed to explain metabolic dysfunction in rodent  models of HD. Here we show that transglutaminase 2 (TG2), which is upregulated in HD,  exacerbates transcriptional dysregulation by acting as a selective corepressor of nuclear genes.  TG2 inhibition by RNA knockdown, genetic deletion, or administration of a novel irreversible,  peptide-based TG2 inhibitor (ZDON) de-repressed two established regulators of mitochondrial  function, PGC-1α and cytochrome c in a cell model of HD. TG2 must localize to non-coding or  coding regions of these mitochondrial metabolic genes to silence their transcription. As expected,  TG2 inhibition reversed the increased susceptibility of HD mouse cells and human HD  myoblasts to the mitochondrial toxin, 3-nitroproprionic acid (3-NP); however, protection  mediated by TG2 inhibition was not associated with improved mitochondrial bioenergetics.  Indeed, an unbiased array analysis indicated that TG2 inhibition leads to normalization of not  only mitochondrial genes but of nearly 40% of genes that are dysregulated in HD mouse striatal  neurons, including chaperone and histone genes. Indeed, TG2 interacts directly with Histone 3 in  the nucleus. Moreover, TG2 inhibition significantly attenuated photoreceptor degeneration in a  Drosophila model of HD and protected mouse HD striatal neurons (YAC128) from NMDA-  induced toxicity. Altogether these findings demonstrate that TG2 mediates its deleterious effects  in HD by contributing to broad transcriptional dysregulation of genes representing many cellular  functions. These studies define a novel HDAC-independent epigenetic strategy for treating  neurodegeneration.

DESIGN
To evaluate the effect of TG2 inhibition (treatment with ZDON, Boc-DON, CystamineA, and Control) in striatal cell lines from a transgenic model of Huntington disease (Q111) vs. control (Q7). One sample (WT.boc.3, 4068264015_G) failed the QC test and was excluded from further analyses.

