TITLE
Genome-wide analysis of alternative splicing points to novel leukemia-relevant genes in acute myeloid leukemia.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Alternative mRNA splicing represents an effective mechanism of regulating gene function and is a key element to increase the coding capacity of the human genome. Today, an increasing number of reports illustrates that aberrant splicing events are common and functionally important for cancer development. However, more comprehensive analyses are warranted to get novel insights into the biology underlying malignancies like e.g. acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Here, we performed a genome-wide screening of splicing events in AML using an exon microarray platform. We analyzed complex karyotype and core binding factor (CBF) AML cases (n=64) in order to evaluate the ability to detect alternative splicing events distinguishing distinct leukemia subgroups. Testing different commercial and open source software tools to compare the respective AML subgroups, we could identify a large number of potentially alternatively spliced transcripts with a certain overlap of the different approaches. Selected candidates were further investigated by PCR and sequence analysis: out of 24 candidate genes studied, we could confirm alternative splice forms in 8 genes of potential pathogenic relevance, such as PRMT1 regulating transcription through histone methylation and participating in DNA damage response, and PTPN6, which encodes for a negative regulator of cell cycle control and apoptosis. In summary, this first large Exon microarray based study demonstrates that transcriptome splicing analysis in AML is feasible but challenging, in particular with regard to the currently available software solutions. Nevertheless, our results show that alternatively spliced candidate genes can be detected, and we provide a guide how to approach such analyses.

DESIGN
Exon expression analysis was performed using GeneChip Human Exon 1.0 ST microarrays in 64 AML patients.

