TITLE
Deciphering the porcine intestinal microRNA transcriptome

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
Background While more than 700 microRNAs (miRNAs) are known in human, a comparably low number has been identified in swine. Because of the close phylogenetic distance to humans, pigs serve as a suitable model for studying e.g. intestinal development or disease. Recent studies indicate that miRNAs are key regulators of intestinal development and their aberrant expression leads to intestinal malignancy. Results Here, we present the identification of hundreds of apparently novel miRNAs in the porcine intestine. MiRNAs were first identified by means of deep sequencing followed by miRNA precursor prediction using the miRDeep algorithm as well as searching for conserved miRNAs. Second, the porcine miRNAome along the entire intestine (duodenum, proximal and distal jejunum, ileum, ascending and transverse colon) was unraveled using customized miRNA microarrays based on the identified sequences as well as known porcine and human ones. In total, the expression of 332 intestinal miRNAs was discovered, of which 201 represented assumed novel porcine miRNAs. The identified hairpin forming precursors were in part organized in genomic clusters, and most of the precursors were located on chromosomes 3 and 1, respectively. Hierarchical clustering of the expression data revealed subsets of miRNAs that are specific to distinct parts of the intestine pointing to their impact on cellular signaling networks. Conclusions In this study, we have applied a straight forward approach to decipher the porcine intestinal miRNAome for the first time in mammals using a piglet model. The high number of identified novel miRNAs in the porcine intestine points out their crucial role in intestinal function as shown by pathway analysis. On the other hand, the reported miRNAs may share orthologs in other mammals such as human still to be discovered.

DESIGN
RNA isolation from porcine intestinal tissue Intestinal samples (~ 2 cm circle segments) were taken from duodenum, proximal and distal jejunum, ileum, ascending and transverse colon of four 31 days old healthy piglets (EUROC x Pietrain). The piglets were weaned at the age of 28 days. Samples were quick-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. In order to obtain representative measurements in each intestinal locus, three cross sections of approximately 2 mm out of the 2 cm segment of frozen intestine were examined. These 3 sections were pooled and total RNA was isolated from samples using an automated homogenizer (FastPrep Instrument, MP Biomedicals, Heidelberg, Germany) and the mirVana miRNA Isolation Kit (Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The RNA quality and quantity of all samples were proven using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer and the RNA 6000 Nano Kits (Agilent, Waldbronn, Germany) and the Nanodrop 1000 Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). Microfluidic miRNA microarrays Microfluidic microarray experiments were performed using customized Geniom biochips (febit). Customized microarrays were synthesized with the Geniom One device (febit) applying febit’s standard shortmer kit for oligonucleotide synthesis. The light-activated in situ oligonucleotide synthesis using a digital micromirror device was performed within the Geniom One instrument on an activated three-dimensional reaction carrier consisting of a glass-silicon-glass sandwich (biochip). Using standard DNA synthesis reagents and 3’-phosphoramidites carrying 5’-photolabile protective group, oligonucleotides were synthesized in parallel in eight individually accessible microchannels (referred to as microarrays) of one biochip. Prior to synthesis, the glass surface was activated by coating with spacer to facilitate probe-target interaction and to avoid probe-probe interface [37]. Two different microarray designs were used. The first one included only the 399 miRDeep predicted mature miRNAs and their star sequences in seven replicates allowing highly accurate validation of the miRDeep prediction plus 16 spike-in controls. The second design consisted of 1117 features in triplicate, including the identified conserved porcine mature miRNA sequences (18 mapping to the porcine genome and another 124, which did not map), 74 known porcine and 885 human miRNAs from miRBase (13.0) and 16 spike-in controls. For microarray experiments, intestinal total RNA samples from different loci of four subjects were isolated independently and respective pools of total RNA samples were prepared. All pools underwent a second quality control to determine the quality and quantity using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer and the RNA 6000 Nano Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For each microarray 250 ng of total RNA were suspended in 25 µl of febit’s proprietary miRNA hybridization buffer. The hybridization was performed automatically for 16h at 42°C using the Geniom RT-Analyzer (febit). After stringent washing a microfluidic-based extension assay was performed to label the miRNAs using biotinylated nucleotides. After washing, biotinylated nucleotides were detected by streptavidin-phycoerythrin and signal recognition and calculation were done automatically within milliseconds. The background of the chips was effectively corrected by global background subtraction and inter-array effects were corrected by variance stabilizing normalization.

