TITLE
Oryza sativa genes expressed in the early compatible interaction with root-knot nematode (affy_meloidogyne_rice)

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa

SUMMARY
affy_meloidogyne_rice - affy_meloidogyne_rice - Plant-parasitic nematodes cause profound economic losses to global agriculture with the obligate sedentary endoparasitic varieties; amongst them the cyst and Root Knot Nematode (RKN) species are the most damaging. Meloidogyne graminicola is a RKN mainly found in the monocotyledous plants. In the compatible interaction with Oryza sativa, M. graminicola induces the characteristic formation of hook-like galls resulting from the redifferentiation of root cells into multinucleate giant cells. In order to understand the global transcriptome changes occurring during infection, several recent microarray studies on root knots have demonstrated complex changes in host plant gene expression in response to infection. However, to our knowledge, all these transcriptome studies were performed on dicotyledous plants. A histological study enabled us to observe hyperplasia and hypertrophy of the surrounding cells leading to the formation of hook-like galls. We also investigated the plant response to M. graminicola by carrying out a global analysis of gene expression during gall formation in rice, using giant cell-enriched root tissues at an early stage (2dpi) and a latter stage (4dpi) of gall development.-Oryza sativa (var. Nipponbare) seedlings were grown on 6 cm3 SAP substrate completed with diluted Hoaglands solution (Reversat et al., 1999). Culture units were placed in a growth chamber illuminated with fluorescent tubes 9/24 h and maintained at 23°C for 5 days before being inoculated with a 100 J2-stage juveniles M. graminicola. One day after inoculation (dai), the rice seedlings were immersed in de-ionised water to remove all J2s that had not penetrated the roots and allowing synchronization of the infection. Each seedling was transferred to a hydroponic mini chamber (Reversat et al., 2004). Sampling was performed at 2 and 4 dai and each of them contained galls from 70 infected plants, they were then hand-dissected, frozen in liquid-nitrogen and stored at -80°C. As reference samples, uninfected meristematic root fragments were dissected from seedlings grown under the same conditions. Each sample was replicated 3 times. Keywords: normal vs disease comparison,time course

DESIGN
9 arrays - rice

