TITLE
Comparison of retinal gene expression in wild-type and XOPS-mCFP (rod degeneration) transgenic zebrafish

ORGANISM
Danio rerio

SUMMARY
Purpose. XOPS-mCFP transgenic zebrafish experience a continual cycle of rod photoreceptor development and degeneration throughout life, making them a useful model to investigate the molecular determinants of rod photoreceptor regeneration. The purpose of this study was to compare the gene expression profiles of wild type and XOPS-mCFP retinas in order to identify genes that may contribute to the regeneration of the rods.   Methods. Wild type and XOPS-mCFP retinal mRNA was subjected to microarray analysis using the Agilent platform. The Ingenuity Pathway Analysis program was used to identify biologically relevant processes that were significantly represented in the dataset. Expression changes were verified by RT-PCR. Selected genes were further examined during retinal development and in adult retinas by in situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry, and using a transgenic fluorescent reporter line.   Results. Over 600 genes displayed significant expression changes in XOPS-mCFP retinas compared to wild type controls. Many of the downregulated genes were associated with phototransduction, whereas upregulated genes were associated with several biological functions, including cell cycle, DNA replication and repair, cell development and cell death. RT-PCR analysis of a subset of these genes confirmed the microarray results. Three transcription factors (sox11b, insm1a, and c-myb) displaying increased expression in XOPS-mCFP retinas were also expressed throughout retinal development and in the persistently neurogenic ciliary marginal zone.   Conclusions. This study identified numerous gene expression changes in response to rod degeneration in zebrafish, and further suggests a role for the transcriptional regulators sox11b, insm1a, and c-myb in both retinal development and rod photoreceptor regeneration.

DESIGN
Two-condition experiment: wild-type vs. XOPS-mCFP retinas. Four biological replicates for each condition. RNA was prepared from one retina for each sample. Each hybridization was accompanied by a dye-swap control, for a total of eight array hybridizations.

