TITLE
microRNA profiling in primary clear cell renal cell carcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common neoplasm of the adult kidney.  Currently, there are no biomarkers for the diagnostic, prognostic, or predictive applications in RCC.  MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short non protein-coding RNAs that negatively regulate gene expression and have been shown to be involved in cancer.  We analyzed a total of 70 matched pairs of clear cell RCC (ccRCC) and normal kidney tissues from the same patients by microarray analysis and validated our results by quantitative real time PCR. We identified 166 miRNAs significantly dysregulated in ccRCC.  MiR-122, miR-155 and miR-210 had the highest fold changes of overexpression while miR-200c, miR-335, and miR-218 were the most downregulated.  We performed extensive bioinformatics analysis including a combinatorial analysis of previously reported miRNAs dysregulated in RCC and extensive target prediction analysis. Many miRNAs were predicted to target a number of genes involved in RCC pathogenesis.  Our results showed that miRNA dysregulation in RCC can be attributed in part, to chromosomal aberrations, the co-regulation of miRNA clusters, and co-expression with host genes.  We also correlated miRNA expression with clinical characteristics and found miR-155 expression was correlated with ccRCC tumor size. In conclusion, our analysis showed that a number of miRNAs are dysregulated in ccRCC and may contribute to kidney cancer pathogenesis by targeting more than one key molecule. We identified mechanisms that may contribute to miRNA dysregulation in ccRCC.   Dysregulated miRNAs represent potential biomarkers for kidney cancer.

DESIGN
We preformed a miRNA microarray on 20 pairs of matched primary clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) and normal kidney tissue from the same patient (St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Canada).   One matched pair was used per array for a total of 20 arrays.  Microarray results were validated by quantitative real time PCR using an independent set of 50 matched pairs of ccRCC and normal kidney tissue from the same patient.

