TITLE
Immunoprotective properties of sertoli cells: potential genes and pathways that confer immune privilege for sertoli cell transplantation and in the testis

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Immune privileged Sertoli cells (SC) survive when transplanted across immunological barriers and prolong the survival of co-transplanted allogeneic and xenogeneic cells in rodent models. However, the mechanism for this survival and protection remains unresolved. We have recently identified a mouse Sertoli cell line (MSC-1) that lacks some of the immunoprotective abilities associated with primary SC. The objective of this study was to compare the survival and gene expression profiles of primary SC and MSC-1 cells to identify factors or immune-related pathways potentially important for SC immune privilege. Primary SC or MSC-1 cells were transplanted as allografts to the renal subcapsular area of naïve BALB/c mice and cell survival was analyzed by immunohistochemistry. Additionally, transcriptome differences were investigated by microarray and pathway analyses. While primary SC were detected within the grafts with 100% graft survival throughout the 20-day study, MSC-1 cells w  ere rejected between 11 and 14 days with 0% graft survival at 20 days post-transplantation. Microarray analysis identified 3198 genes that were differentially expressed with a ± 4-fold or higher level in primary SC. Cluster and pathway analyses indicate that the mechanism of SC immune privilege is likely complex with multiple immune modulators being involved such as immunosuppressive cytokines and complement inhibitors, lipid mediators for controlling inflammation, and junctional molecules that control leukocyte movement in and out of the immune privileged space. Further study of these immune modulators will increase our understanding of SC immune privilege and in the long-term lead to improvements in transplantation success.

DESIGN
We conducted microarray and pathway analyses to identify genes and immune-related pathways differentially regulated by aggregated primary Sertoli cells and MSC-1 cell line. Aggregated 19 to 20-day mice primary Sertoli cells and MSC-1 cell line were used to determine the global transcriptome differences important for the survival and protection of transplanted cells.

