TITLE
Influence of elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide on transcriptional responses of Bradyrhizobium japonicum in the soybean rhizosphere

ORGANISM
Bradyrhizobium japonicum

SUMMARY
Elevated atmospheric CO2 can influence the structure and function of rhizosphere microorganisms by altering root growth and the quality and quantity of compounds released into the rhizosphere via root exudation. In these studies we investigated the transcriptional responses of Bradyrhizobium japonicum cells growing in the rhizosphere of soybean plants exposed to elevated atmospheric CO2. The results of microarray analyses indicated that atmospheric elevated CO2 concentration indirectly influences on expression of large number of Bradyrhizobium genes through soybean roots. In addition, genes involved in C1 metabolism, denitrification and FixK2-associated genes, including those involved in nitrogen fixation, microanaerobic respiration, respiratory nitrite reductase, and heme biosynthesis, were significantly up-regulated under conditions of elevated CO2 in the rhizosphere, relative to plants and bacteria grown under ambient CO2 growth conditions. The expression profile of genes involved in lipochitinoligosaccharide Nod factor biosynthesis and negative transcriptional regulators of nodulation genes, nolA and nodD2, were also influenced by plant growth under conditions of elevated CO2. Taken together, results of these studies indicate that growth of soybeans under conditions of elevated atmospheric CO2 influences gene expressions in B. japonicum in the soybean rhizosphere, resulting in changes to carbon/nitrogen metabolism, respiration, and nodulation efficiency.

DESIGN
Bradyrhizobium japonicum strains were grown in the soybean rhizosphere under two different CO2 concentrations. Transcriptional profiling of B. japonicum was compared between cells grown under elevated CO2 and ambient conditions. Four biological replicates of each treatment were prepared, and four microarray slides were used for each strain.

