TITLE
Bystander response to 0.5 Gy of alpha-particles in a human 3-dimensional skin model in 16h after exposure to ionizing radiation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Ionizing radiation (IR) not only affects cells that are directly irradiated but also their non-irradiated neighbors, which show responses known as bystander effects. While bystander and direct responses have several common end points including apoptosis and micronucleation, chromatin remodeling and altered levels or activities of regulatory proteins, they can be quantitatively and qualitatively different. The majority of studies of radiation bystander effects have utilized 2-dimensional in vitro systems, but we have recently demonstrated such effects in EPI-200 (Mat-Tek, Ashland, MA), a 3-dimensional tissue model that precisely imitates the structure and function of human epidermis. Global gene expression is a powerful tool for uncovering both fundamental signaling processes and the mechanistic basis of cellular or physiological effects. By exposing only a thin strip across the center of the EPI-200 tissue, we have been able to measure global gene expression responses in bystander cells located at 0.125 and 0.625 um from the irradiation line, in 16h after irradiation. The data were analyzed using BRB-Array Tools (NIH), and further network analysis was performed with IPA (Ingenuity). Significantly responding genes were identified at the both distances. For instance, all sets demonstrated upregulation of two key enzymes of the lipid biosynthesis, UGT1 and PITPNB, and downregulation of proapoptotic proteins: BAX and ARHGEF5. In contrast, several proteins involved in transcriptional repression (CHD6, CHD8 andWRNIP1) were strongly upregulated suggesting a rearrangement in the gene transcription. These changes suggest an activation of bystander mechanisms different from those observed in 2-dimensional cell cultures.

DESIGN
Radiation induced gene expression in 3-dimensional tissue model, Epi-200, was measured in 16 hours after exposure to  0.5 Gy of alpha-particles. Three independent experiments were performed for the samples collected at different distances from the irradiation line (125-625 and 625-1125 um) using three tissue fragments per a data point.

