TITLE
Bystander responses to 0.5Gy of alpha-particles in a human 3-dimensional skin model in 4h after exposure to ionizing radiation

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Direct irradiation of 3-dimensional skin model, Epi-200, with alpha-particles led to differential regulation of 545 genes at 4 h postirradiation. Unlike the traditional 2-dimensional in vitro systems, Epi-200 made of the primary cells, epidermal human keratinocytes. It mimics the structure of the human epidermis Global gene expression is a powerful tool for uncovering both fundamental signaling processes and the mechanistic basis of cellular or physiological effects. By comparing irradiated tissues with non-irradiated control, we have been able to measure global gene expression responses and reveal the affected biological pathways and molecular functions. The data were analyzed using BRB-Array Tools (NIH), and further gene ontology analysis was performed with Panther (Applied Biosystems). The responding pathways were identified jointly and separately for up- and downregulated genes. Receptors (12 genes, p=0.0467), including nuclear hormone receptors (3 genes, p=8.2 x E-04) and Ser/Thr receptors (3 genes, p=5.3 x E-03), chemokines (2 genes, p=0.0155) and signaling molecules were overrepresented among 123 upregulated genes while DNA binding proteins (27 genes, p=5.07 x E-04), particularly helicases (6 genes, p=3.61 x E-03) and, G-protein modulators (16 genes, p=4.4 x E-03) were overrepresented among 403 downregulated genes. Remarkably, 6 differentially regulated genes in this group were represented by helicases and methyltransferases (6 genes, p=0. 0534) involved in methylation of histones and DNA. These changes confirmed an importance in the biological response of two its basic components: receptor-regulated pathways and chromatin remodeling. Upregulation the first group supposes to increase sensitivity of irradiated cells to chemokines and cytokines while downregulation of the second group would likely affect the DNA methylation pattern and stimulate the transcription.

DESIGN
Radiation induced gene expression in 3-dimensional tissue model, Epi-200, was measured at 4 hours after exposure to  0.5 Gy of alpha-particles. Three independent experiments were performed using one tissue sample per a data point.

