TITLE
Expression profiles dysplastic and neoplastic rat liver lesions

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Predisposition to hepatocarcinogenesis is under polygenic control. We analyzed gene expression patterns of dysplastic liver nodules (DN) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) chemically-induced in F344 and BN rats, respectively susceptible and resistant to hepatocarcinogenesis, to evaluate effector mechanisms of predisposition genes, and commonalties between transcription signatures of rat and human liver lesions. Gene expression profiles were determined by microarray analysis and validated by quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot. Cluster analysis revealed two distinctive gene expression patterns, the first of which included normal liver of F344 and BN rats and BN rat nodules, and the second one F344 nodules and HCC of both strains. Expression of 91 and 55 genes of DN and HCC, respectively, showed significant interstrain differences. Considering genes mostly associated with cell proliferation we identified a signature predicting DN evolution to HCC. Notably, expression of oncosuppressors Csmd1, Dmbt, Dusp1, and Gnmt ,in DN, and Bhmt, Dmbt1, Dusp1, Gadd45g, Gnmt, Napsa, Pp2ca, and Ptpn13, in HCC, was higher in BN than F344 rats. Comparative genomics approach, using gene expression data from rat lesions, and human HCC with different prognosis (based on survival length), revealed expression patterns of BN and F344 lesions close to those of human HCCs with better and poorer prognosis, respectively, suggesting that similar molecular events contribute to create a phenotype prone to progression in rats and human lesions. In conclusion, we identified a molecular signature of DN prone to progress to HCC and suggest that oncosuppressor genes are determinants of the genetically transmitted resistance to hepatocarcinogenesis.

DESIGN
Three-condition experiment, Normal liver vs. Dysplastic nodules and tumors. Biological replicates: 8 control replicates, 8 nodules replicates and 7 tumor replicates.

