TITLE
The interferon induced transmembrane protein 1 (Ifitm1): detailed analysis on its assumed functions

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Several functions have been suggested for the interferon induced transmembrane protein 1 (Iftitm1) gene in mammals. Originally it was identified as a member of a gene family that is highly inducible by type I and type II inteferons. Based on its expression during primordial germ CELl (PGC) specification it was suggested to be required for normal PGC migration. Ifitm1 targeted knockdown experiments in mouse embryos provided evidence that the gene might be necessary for normal somitogenesis. Finally, the complete deletion of the Ifitm gene cluster on mouse chromosome 7 revealed that the five deleted Ifitm1 genes are not essential for PCG migration and fertility. Here, we generated a novel targeted knockin allele of the Ifitm1 gene by replacing its coding region with a lacZ reporter gene to systematically reassess the suggested functions of this gene. We find that during embryogenesis somites and in the adult the vertebral column appear normal in homozygous Ifitm1 knockout mice, strongly suggesting that Ifitm1 is not essential for normal segmentation of the paraxial mesoderm. In addition, homozygous Ifitm1 mutant mice are fertile, reproduce normally and have normal sperm quality. Furthermore, we show that the Ifitm1 loss-of-function allele does not cause immunological mutant phenotypes in unchallenged as well as in Listeria challenged homozygous mutant animals. To further focus on unique functional requirements of Ifitm1, we took advantage of the lacZ reporter gene in the Ifitm1 locus to analyze for the first time in detail and with high sensitivity its complex expression pattern in mouse embryos from E8.5 to E14.5 and in adult organs. The detailed description of the Ifitm1 expression domains will support the identification of organs that might be affected by the loss of Ifitm1 function.

DESIGN
We performed gene expression microarray analysis of ten lung tissues from male adult Ifitm1-deficient and control mice

