TITLE
Genomic Characterization of Adaptive Mutations that Effect Minimal Fitness Trade-offs in Evolved Clones of Saccharomyces cerevisiae

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
In some of the earliest uses of genome-wide gene-expression microarrays and array-based Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH), a set of diploid yeasts that had undergone experimental evolution under aerobic glucose limitation was used to explore how gene expression and genome structure had responded to this selection pressure. To more deeply understand how adaptation to one environment might constrain or enhance performance in another we have now identified the adaptive mutations in this set of clones using whole-genome sequencing, and have assessed whether the evolved clones had become generalists or specialists by assaying their fitness under three contrasting growth environments: aerobic and anaerobic glucose limitation and aerobic acetate limitation. Additionally, evolved clones and their common ancestor were assayed for gene expression, biomass estimates and residual substrate levels under the alternative growth conditions. Relative fitnesses were evaluated by competing each clone against a common reference strain in each environment. Unexpectedly, we found that the evolved clones also outperformed their ancestor under strictly fermentative and strictly oxidative growth conditions. We conclude that yeasts evolving under aerobic glucose limitation become generalists for carbon limitation, as the mutations selected for in one environment are advantageous in others. High-throughput sequencing of the evolved clones uncovered mutations in genes involved in glucose sensing, signaling, and transport that in part explain these physiological phenotypes, with different sets of mutations found in independently-evolved clones. Earlier gene expression data from aerobic glucose-limited cultures had revealed a shift from fermentation towards respiration in all evolved clones explaining increased fitness in that condition. However, because the evolved clones also show higher fitness under strictly anaerobic conditions and under conditions requiring strictly respirative growth, this switch cannot be the sole source of adaptive benefit. Furthermore, because independently evolved clones are genetically distinct we conclude that there are multiple mutational paths leading to the generalist phenotype. Strain Name: Parental strain (CP1AB) or evolved clones (E1 - E5) Media: aerobic / anaerobic

DESIGN
36 hybridizations

