TITLE
Synergistic Tumor Suppressor Activity of E-cadherin and p53 in a Conditional Mouse Model for Diffuse-Type Gastric Cancer

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Gastric cancer is the second most frequent cause of death from cancer in the world, diffuse-type gastric cancer (DGC) exhibiting a poor prognosis. Germline mutations of CDH1, encoding E-cadherin, have been reported in hereditary DGCs, and genetic and/or epigenetic alterations of CDH1 are frequently detected in sporadic DGCs. Genetic alterations of TP53 are also frequently found in DGCs. To examine the synergistic effect of loss of E-cadherin and p53 on gastric carcinogenesis, we established a mouse line in which E-cadherin and p53 are specifically inactivated in the stomach parietal cell lineage. METHODS: We crossed Atp4b-Cre mice with Cdh1loxP/loxP and Trp53loxP/loxP mice, and examined the gastric phenotype of Atp4b-Cre+;Cdh1loxP/loxP;Trp53loxP/loxP mice. RESULTS: Non-polarization of E-cadherin-negative parietal cells and proton pump-negative atypical foci were observed in the transgenic mice. Intramucosal cancers and invasive cancers composed of poorly differentiated carcinoma cells and signet ring cells, which were histologically very similar to those in humans, were found from 6 and 9 months, respectively. Fatal DGCs developed at 100% penetrance within a year, frequently metastasized to lymph nodes, and had tumorigenic activity in immunodeficient mice. Gene expression profiling analyses also revealed that DGCs in the E-cadherin/p53-deficient mice resembled human DGCs. CONCLUSIONS: Our mouse line is the first genetically modified mouse model of DGC and very useful for clarifying the mechanism underlying gastric carcinogenesis, and provides a new approach to the treatment and prevention of DGC because of morphological and biochemical similarities with human DGC.

DESIGN
Two-condition experiment, Gastric cancer vs. normal gastric mucosal tissues. Biological replicates: pooled control sample from five normal gastric mucosal tissues, three replicates from diffuse-type gastric cancer.

