TITLE
Expression data from In vitro induced C2  M cells in the presence of commensal bacteria

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
M cells are the main site of bacterial translocation in the intestine. We used the in vitro M cell model to study the effect of the commensal bacteria; Lactobacillus salivarius, Eschericha coli and Bacteroides fragilis, on M cell gene expression. Bacterial translocation across the gut mucosa has traditionally been based on the detection of commensals in the mesenteric lymph node. Differential rates of commensal translocation have been reported in vivo, however fewer studies have examined translocation of commensals at the level of the gut epithelial M cell. In this study we employed an in vitro M cell model to quantify translocation of various bacteria. C2BBe1 cells were differentiated into M cells and the gene expression profile and transport kinetics of different bacterial strains, namely Lactobacillus salivarius, Escherichia coli, and Bacteroides fragilis, was assessed. For comparison with M cell uptake, the THP-1 monocytic cell line was used to analyze bacterial internalization and resulting cytokine production. The commensal bacterial strains were translocated across M cells with different efficiencies; E. coli and B. fragilis translocated with equal efficiency while L. salivarius translocated with less efficiency. In contrast, L. salivarius was internalized by THP-1 cells to a higher degree than B. fragilis or E. coli and was associated with a different cytokine profile. Microarray analysis showed both common and differential gene expression amongst the bacteria and control polystyrene beads. In the presence of bacteria, but not beads, upregulated genes were mainly involved in transcription regulation and dephosphorylation, e.g. EGR1, JUN; whereas proinflammatory and stress response genes were primarily upregulated by E. coli and B. fragilis, but not L. salivarius nor beads, e.g. IL8, TNFAIP3. These results demonstrate that M cells have the ability to discriminate between different commensal bacteria and modify subsequent immune responses.

DESIGN
C2bbe1 cells were converted to M cells (C2M) following 21 days of culture on Transwells in the presence of Raji B cells. C2M cells were co-cultured alone, Lactobacillus salivarius, Eschericha coli, Bacteroides fragilis and control beads. Total RNA was extracted and processed for Affymetrix array hybridisation

