TITLE
Leukocyte CD antibody microarray profiling reveals immune markers associated with aging and gender (datasets 1 and 2)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The study of disease-associated immune biomarkers has revealed underlying pathogenic mechanisms and provided diagnostic and prognostic values in numerous clinical settings. Accurate immune profiling of normal age and sex demographics is crucial for understanding the relevance of disease biomarkers. The incidence of age-associated diseases in the elderly and prevalence of diseases in specific genders may be explained by these normal phenotypic variation in the cellular immune system. Here we use microarrays of cluster of differentiation (CD) antibodies to immunophenotype populations of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from healthy adult blood donors. The data revealed a set of statistically significant age- and gender-dependent expression patterns across the study population. We identified functional differences in immune biomarkers on PBMC associated with major innate, adaptive and inflammatory immune functions. The CD array data supported established observations using flow cytometric methods on age-associated changes in immune biomarkers, while also identifying novel markers associated with age and/or gender. The data demonstrates the utility of CD antibody arrays in providing a systematic and quantitative basis for understanding the development and progression of diseases that have an age-dependent and gender-specific etiology.

DESIGN
Blood samples were collected from healthy male and female blood donors acrooss various age groups, predominantly Caucasians, from the Australian Red Cross Blood Service, Sydney, Australia, and from elderly males enrolled in the Concord Health and Aging in Men Project (CHAMP) at Concord Hospital, Sydney, Australia. PBMCs were fractionated from whole blood and applied to a cell capture CD antibody microarray. The microarray was then scaned by a  DotScan™ slide reader (Medsaic; Eveleigh, NSW, Australia). The number of immobilized cells was proportional to the light scattered at each antibody spot. Binding of PBMCs to each antibody dot was monitored by light scatter and averaged between the duplicate spots on each slide. We then performed statistical analysis to identify CD antigen markers that has an statistically significant association with age and/or gender

