TITLE
Comparative transcriptome profiling of Amyloid Precursor Protein APP family members in the adult cortex

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The β-amyloid precursor protein APP and the related APLPs, undergo complex proteolytic processing giving rise to several fragments. Whereas it is well established that Aβ accumulation is a central trigger for Alzheimer disease (AD), the physiological role of APP family members and their diverse proteolytic products is still largely unknown. The secreted APPsα ectodomain has been shown to be involved in neuroprotection and synaptic plasticity. The γ-secretase generated APP intracellular domain AICD, functions as a transciptional regulator in heterologous reporter assays, although its role for endogenous gene regulation has remained controversial.  To gain further insight into the molecular changes associated with knockout phenotypes and to elucidate the physiological functions of APP family members including their proposed role as transcriptional regulators we performed a DNA microarray transcriptome profiling of the frontal cortex of adult wild type, APP-/-, APLP2-/- and APPsα knockin (KI) mice, APPα/α, expressing solely the secreted APPsα ectodomain. Biological pathways affected by the lack of APP family members included regulation of neurogenesis, regulation of transcription and regulation of neuron projection development. Comparative analysis of transcriptome changes and qPCR validation identified co-regulated gene sets. Interestingly, these included heat shock proteins and plasticity related genes that were down-regulated in knock-out cortices. In contrast, we failed to detect significant differences in expression of previously proposed AICD target genes including Bace1, Kai1, Gsk3b, p53, Tip60 and Vglut2. Only Egfr was slightly up-regulated in APLP2-/- mice. Comparison of APP-/- and APPα/α with wild-type mice revealed a high proportion of co-regulated genes indicating an important role of the C-terminus for cellular signaling. Finally, comparison of APLP2-/- on different genetic backgrounds revealed that background related transcriptome changes may dominate over changes due to the knockout of a single gene.   Shared transcriptome profiles corroborated closely related physiological functions of APP family members in the adult central nervous system. As expression of proposed AICD target genes was not altered in adult cortex, this may indicate that these genes are not affected by lack of APP under resting conditions or only in a small subset of cells.

DESIGN
Prefrontal cortices of adult male mice (24 - 28 weeks) of the following genotypes were analyzed: WT (n=3), APP-/-  (n=3), APPα/α (n=3), APLP2-/- (n=3), APLP2(R1)-/- (n=3). WT, APP-/-, APPα/α, APLP2-/- had been backcrossed for six generations to C57BL/6 mice. APLP2(R1)-/- harbors the identical knockout allele as APLP2-/- but was back-crossed only once.

