TITLE
Proliferation of mouse thyroid cells after partial thyroidectomy

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
While the thyroid has the capacity to grow in response to a stimulus that perturbs the pituitary-thyroid axis, cells involved in this process have not been well characterized.  In this study, partial thyroidectomy was used to produce regeneration.  Histological and gene profiling analyses were carried out using normal mouse thyroid as well as those after partial thyroidectomy.  In the central area of the right or left normal thyroid lobe, a proliferative center was found with the occasional presence of micro-follicles, where BrdU-positive and/or C cells were mainly localized. Two weeks after partial thyroidectomy, the number of BrdU-positive cells and cells with clear or faintly eosionphilic cytoplasm, markedly increased in the central area of the thyroid lobe and the overlapping area close to the cutting edge.  Clear-looking cells had scant cytoplasmic components as determined by electron microscopy; some retained characteristic features of C cells such as the presence of neuroendocrine granules while others retained follicular cell specific features such as those directly facing a lumen with microvilli at the apical side of the cell.  Some of the clear-looking cells were BrdU-positive and expressed FOXA2, the definitive endoderm lineage marker.  Microarray analysis further revealed that partial thyroidectomy affected the expression pattern of genes involved in cellular and/or metabolic process and their regulation categorized as Endocrine System Disorders and Embryonic Development, by Pathway analysis.  These results suggest that cells previously C cells and/or follicular cells may be altered after partial thyroidectomy to become immature cells that participate in the repair and/or regeneration of the thyroid, a process similar to embryonic thyroid development.

DESIGN
Total RNAs used for microarray analysis were prepared from laser capture microdissected mouse thyroids of the central (C) and peripheral (P) areas before (N: normal) and after (D: dissected) partial thyroidectomy.   The RNAs obtained were first amplified, which were then subjected to hybridization using 5 NC (central area of the right or left lobe of normal thyroid), 3 NP (peripheral area of the right or left lobe of normal thyroid), 5DC (central area of the right or left lobe of dissected thyroid), 5 DP (peripheral area of the right or left lobe of dissected thyroid), and universal mouse RNAs as a reference.   The 4-way analysis was carried out: NC vs NP vs DC vs DP.

