TITLE
Gene expression profiles of vaccinated fish using a long-term efficiency mixed vaccine against Edwardsiella tarda performed by a new designed oligo DNA microarray in Japanese flounder Paralichthys olivaceus

ORGANISM
Paralichthys olivaceus

SUMMARY
Gene expression profiles by microarray have contributed for a elucidation of an immune-response and a determination of efficiency in vaccination. Recent day, edwardsielosis have caused a fatal damage in the aquaculture of Japanese flounder, Paralichthys olivaceus. However the formalin killed-cell vaccines made from Edwardsiella tarda isolated same fish species were not efficient. Recent our study revealed the mixed FKC vaccine made from the two different type of E. tarda protected Japanese flounder against Edwardsiella tarda infection for long-term. In this study, we analyzed the immune-response of a vaccinated fish kidney using the mixed FKC vaccine against Edwardsiella tarda with an Agilent custom-oligo DNA microarray on 9,573 probes of Japanese flounder. Our study revealed that the mixed FKC vaccine confered a strong immune-response and keeped a efficient for long-term on Japanese flounder.

DESIGN
The kidney were isolated from the vaccinated Japanese flounder using the three formalin-killed vaccines, 1st is a typical type of E. tarda strain UH6 isolated from Japanese flounder, Paralichthys olivaceus, 2nd is a atypical type of E. tarda strain UT1 isolated from Red seabream, Pagrus major and 3rd is an equal (1:1) mixture FKC with these two type E. tarda. Fishes were vaccinated by intramuscular injection using the 1.0 x 10^8 cell of FKC vaccines. After 3 and 7 days from a vaccination, fish kidney was isolated. We also isolated non-vaccinated fish kidney as a control. We analyzed a four of individual fish kidney vaccinated using mixed FKC on day 7. We also analyze the three samples which are the two of the pooled total RNA from a two fish and the one of the one fish total RNA in typical FKC and atypical FKC vaccinated fish after 3 and 7 days from a vaccination, mixed FKC vaccinated fish after day 3 from a vaccination and a control (22 hybridization).

