TITLE
Gene expression profile of hepatocellular carcinoma in low-dose, repeated diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-treated rat treated with erlotinib

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Gene-expression profiles of rat hepatocellular carcinoma induced by diethylnitrosamine (DEN) and the effect of erlotinib Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the sixth most common solid tumor worldwide and the third leading cause of cancer-related death. Given the lack of successful treatment options, chemoprevention in high-risk patients has been proposed as an alternative strategy. Mounting evidence supports a role for epidermal growth factor (EGF) during chronic liver disease and hepatocellular transformation. We address the hypothesis that blocking the EGF-EGF receptor (EGFR) pathway may be an effective strategy for inhibiting fibrogenesis and hepatocarcinogenesis. A rat model of diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced cirrhosis was used to examine the effects of erlotinib on underlying chronic liver disease and HCC formation. The DEN-induced rat model closely resembles disease progression in humans both pathologically and molecularly. Erlotinib significantly prevented the development of HCC tumor nodules in a dose-dependent fashion. Further, erlotinib inhibited the activation of hepatic stellate cells and prevented fibrogenesis. Erlotinib also reduced hepatotoxicity and improved liver function. Finally, a gene expression signature predictive of poor survival in human cirrhosis patients was reversed in response to erlotinib. Our data demonstrate for the first time that EGFR inhibition prevents liver fibrogenesis. Further, our results suggest that erlotinib is a potentially effective HCC chemoprevention strategy through inhibition of cirrhosis progression which can be monitored at the molecular level.

DESIGN
Animals received humane care according to the criteria outlined in the “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals” of the National Academy of Sciences. All animals were maintained in accordance with the institutional guidelines of the Massachusetts General Hospital Subcommittee on Research Animal Care. Male Wistar rats received weekly IP injections of diethylnitrosamine (DEN) at 50 mg/kg, 100mg/kg, or vehicle control (PBS) for 18 weeks. A subset of rats received either daily (5X a week) IP injections of 2 mg/kg erlotinib or vehicle control during weeks 13 - 18. In a separate study, the erlotinib dose was lowered to 0.5 mg/kg. The vehicle groups from the two studies were not significantly different so they were combined together for analysis. Rats were weighed at the end of each week. Animals were sacrificed at 9, 13 and 19 weeks after a one-week washout period to eliminate acute effects of DEN. At the time of sacrifice, the non-tumor liver tissues were collected in RNase-free tubes and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen tissues were stored at -80°C until RNA extraction.

