TITLE
Differential transcript accumulation in seedling and mature shoots identifies components contributing to corn earworm resistance

ORGANISM
Zea mays

SUMMARY
As maize seedlings germinate into the soil, they encounter an environment teeming with insects  seeking rich sources of nutrition. Maize presumably has developed a number of molecular  mechanisms to ensure survival at the beginning of its life cycle. Bioassays indicated maize  seedlings were more toxic to caterpillars than shoots from 3 or 4 leafed plants. Microarray  technology was utilized to document the expression of a number of genes with potential  defensive functions in seedling tissue. In addition to elevated levels of the genes involved in the  biosynthesis of DIMBOA (2,4-dihydroxy-7-methoxy-1,4-benzoxazin-3-one), an anti-insect  resistance molecule, other highly expressed genes in the seedling encode the following putative  proteins: defensin, hydroxyproline and proline-rich protein, thaumatin-like protein, lipase,  cystatin, protease inhibitor, and a variety of proteases. Changes in the levels of gene expression  by the microarray technology were well correlated to results using quantitative RT-PCR. The  potential resistance genes identified occurred mainly on chromosomes 1 and 5 in the B73  genome. Analysis of promoters of four DIMBOA biosynthetic genes determined that a Dof  transcription factor, two of which were differentially expressed in three vegetative stages, is  possibly involved in regulation of the DIMBOA biosynthetic pathway. The results indicate that  maize employs a wide variety of potential resistance mechanisms in seedling tissue to resist a  possible insect attack.

DESIGN
Three different Zea mays plant (B73) life stages were sampled: a) seedlings, which had grown just above the soil line, which also served as reference tissue (reference tissue was always labeled Cy5 and consisted of leaf shoots pooled from 12 plants); b) leaf shoots from plants with four leaves; and c) leaf shoots from plants with six leaves. There were 3 samples (biological replications) of each treatment (6 plants per sample) and the samples were labeled Cy3 and which were combined with a reference chip for a total of 9 chips: (3 biological replicates of seedling, 4 leaf stage and 6 leaf stage).

