TITLE
Overexpression of NUCKS1 in colorectal cancer correlates with recurrence after curative surgery (gene expression analysis)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Purpose: The purpose of this study is to identify a novel biomarker related with distant metastases of colorectal cancer (CRC). Experimental Design: We investigated mRNA expression profiles in 115 patients with CRC using an Affymetrix Gene Chip, and copy number profiles in 122 patients with CRC using an Affymetrix DNA Sty array. Genes in common between copy number and expression data were extracted as candidate genes. We analyzed the mRNA expression of candidate gene by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in 86 patients as a validation study. Furthermore, we analyzed the protein expression of candidate gene by immunohistochemical study in 269 patients, and investigated the relationship between protein expression and clinicopathologic features. Results: By the combination of copy number analysis and gene expression analysis, We extracted 2 candidate genes related with distant metastases of CRC. Several reports show that NUCKS1, one of candidate genes, is overexpressed in several cancer tissues. But a study about the relationship between NUCKS1 and CRC is none. The mRNA expression of NUCKS1 in cancer tissues was significantly higher than those in normal tissues. Overexpression of NUCKS1 protein was associated with significantly worse　relapse-free survival of CRC. Overexpression of NUCKS1 protein was an independent risk factor for recurrence of CRC. Conclusion: The overexpression of NUCKS1 would be a new biomarker predicting recurrence after colorectal surgery.

DESIGN
Total 115 microarray datasets obtained from LCM samples of colorectal cancer patients were normalized using robust multi-array average (RMA) method under R statistical software version 2.12.1 together with BioConductor package. The normalized gene expression levels were presented as log2-transformed values by RMA, and 62 control probe sets were removed for further analysis. This submission represents the transcriptome component of the study.

