TITLE
Comprehensive across production systems assessment of the impact of in vitro micro-environment on the expression of messengers and long non-coding RNAs in the bovine blastocyst

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
In vitro production of cattle embryos over the past two decades has revealed several negative impacts, which have been attributed to the artificial microenvironment. Studies of embryos produced in vitro clearly point to aberrant gene expression levels. So far, the causal association between phenotype and measured gene expression has not led to substantial improvement of in vitro production systems. The aim of the present study was to generate a unique dataset composed of microarray-derived relative transcript abundance values for blastocysts produced in ten in vitro systems differing primarily in culture medium formulation. Between-group comparisons allowed us to determine the level of overall similarity between systems relative to in vivo reference embryos. The use of the dataset to contrast all in vitro treatments with the in vivo blastocysts pointed to a single common gene network. The “boutique” array contained a panel of novel uncharacterized transcripts that were expressed variably depending on the medium in which the blastocysts were produced. These novel transcripts were expressed differentially in blastocysts even as carry-over from conditions encountered seven days earlier during oocyte maturation. All of the selected novel candidates that were thus expressed were from intergenic regions. The function of this long non-coding RNA remains unknown but points clearly to an additional level of complexity in early embryo development.

DESIGN
For all ten in vitro systems and the in vivo counterparts, three biological replicates were done. Technical duplicates for each of these 33 samples were analyzed to generate a dataset composed of 65 microarray hybridizations (one of the replicated array failed). During analysis, the in vivo derived blastocysts were used as reference. Following data pre-processing (that includes, background subtraction, intra-array normalization (Loess) and inter-array normalization (Quantile), all technical replication (replicated spots on the array and technically replicated arrays) were combined to generate a single value (duplicated spots were averaged and the median was drawn from duplicated arrays) that was used for dowstream significance analysis.

