TITLE
genome-wide gene expression profiling of rice pollen in defferent developmetn stages

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa

SUMMARY
Pollen development from the microspore involves a series of coordinated cellular events, and the resultant mature pollen is specialized in function that it can quickly germinate and produces a polar-growth pollen tube derived from the vegetative cell to deliver two sperms for fertilization. Understanding the molecular program underlying pollen development and germination still remains a major challenge for plant biology. We used Affymetrix GeneChip Rice Genome Array to comprehensively analyzed the dynamic changes in the transcriptomes of rice pollen at five sequential developmental stages from microspores to germinated pollen. Among the 51,279 transcripts on the array, we found 25,062 pollen-preferential transcripts, among which 2,203 were development stage-enriched. The diversity of transcripts decreased greatly from microspores to mature and germinated pollen, whereas the number of stage-enriched transcripts displayed a U-type change, with the lowest at the bicellular pollen stage; and a transition of overrepresented stage-enriched transcript groups associated with different functional categories, which indicates a shift in gene expression program at the bicellular pollen stage. About 54% of the now-annotated rice F-box protein genes were expressed preferentially in pollen. The transcriptome profile of germinated pollen was significantly and positively correlated with that of mature pollen. Analysis of expression profiles and coexpressed features of the pollen-preferential transcripts related to cell cycle, transcription, the ubiquitin/26S proteasome system, phytohormone signalling, the kinase system and defense/stress response revealed five expression patterns, which are compatible with changes in major cellular events during pollen development and germination. A comparison of pollen transcriptomes between rice and Arabidopsis revealed that 56.6% of the rice pollen preferential genes had homologs in Arabidopsis genome, but 63.4% of these homologs were expressed, with a small proportion being expressed preferentially, in Arabidopsis pollen. Rice and Arabidopsis pollen had non-conservative transcription factors each. These results supply novel insights into the molecular program and key components of the regulatory network regulating pollen development and germination. KEYWORDS: rice (Oryza sativa L.), pollination and fertilization, stigma, molecular functions, signaling, microarray, stress response

DESIGN
we generate rice pollen gene expression profiles through comparing genome-wide expression patterns of 5 development-stage pollen grains (uninucleate microspores, bicellular pollen, immature tricellular pollen, mature pollen and germinated pollen grains ) with rice callus cells, roots and leaves by using 57K Affymetrix rice whole genome array.

