TITLE
Breaking endodormancy in leafy spurge crown buds by dehydration-stress and vernalization identifies overlapping molecular networks linked to growth regulators

ORGANISM
Manihot esculenta

SUMMARY
Persistence of the invasive perennial weed leafy spurge is mainly attributed to seasonal production of underground adventitious buds (UABs), which undergo well-defined phases of dormancy (para-, endo- and eco-dormancy). These well-defined phases of dormancy also allow UABs of leafy spurge to survive extreme seasonal variations, including dehydration-stress. Consequently, objectives of this study include understanding the effects of dehydration-stress on vegetative reproduction, flowering competence, and transcript profiles at different phases of bud dormancy. The vegetative growth potential of UABs was monitored by removing the aerial portion of dehydration-stressed plants and re-watering the root system. Further, microarray analysis was used to follow transcriptome profiles to identify critical defense- and signaling-pathways at different phases of dormancy in UABs. Surprisingly, only 3 days of dehydration-stress is required to break the endodormant phase in UABs. In leafy spurge, vernalization of endodormant UABs has previously been shown to induce flower competence, while breaking of endodormancy via dehydration-stress did not induce floral induction. Thus, these two environmental treatments open a unique approach to independently dissect molecular mechanisms involved in endodormancy maintenance and floral competence. Bioinformatics analysis of transcriptome data helped to identify models and overlapping pathways. During endodormancy break, LEC1, PHOTOSYSTEM I RC, and brassinosteroids were identified as ooverlapping hubs of up-regulated genes, and DREB1A, CBF2, GPA1, MYC2, BHLH, BZIP, and flavonoids were identified as overlapping hubs of down-regulated genes. Additionally, key genes involved in metabolic activity, chromatin modification, and cross-talk between growth regulators were identified as playing a role during endodormancy maintenance.

