TITLE
Deep sequencing-based expression transcriptional profiling of RAW264.7  infected with Brucella 16M

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Using Solexa/Illumina's digital gene expression (DGE) system, a tag-based transcriptome sequencing method, we investigated the kinetic transcriptional profile of gene expression in macrophages infected with Brucella melitensis strain 16M. A key aspect of Brucella virulence is their ability to proliferate within professional and nonprofessional phagocytic host cells, thereby successfully bypassing the bactericidal effects of phagocytes. Their virulence and chronic infections are thought to be due to their ability to avoid the killing mechanisms within host cells. Defining the interaction between a host cell and Brucella is crucial to understanding the infectious process. Most researchers have studied the pathogens, but the host plays a very important role during infections. To date, relatively few host factors have been shown important in Brucella infections. However, little is known about the host networks that mediate infection. The objective of the study is to analyze the genes and cellular components related to the innate immunity response to determine the mechanisms through which Brucella avoids the host innate immunity. A total of 3576 and 3962 genes that are differentially expressed between 0 and 4 h and between 0 and 24 h were identified. The identified genes are related to immune processes, signal transduction, inflammation, apoptosis, cell membrane, transcriptional regulation, and intracellular trafficking. Our data have added to the current understanding of different host gene expressions during different infection phases by Brucella spp.

DESIGN
The RAW264.7 cells were seeded into 24-well plates at 5-105 cells/well, incubated in 5% CO2 at 37 °C for 24 h, and then infected with Brucella at a multiplicity of infection of 200. To synchronize the infection, the infected plates were centrifuged at 200 ug for 5 min at room temperature and then incubated at 37 °C for 20 minutes. The infected cell monolayers were washed three times with PBS, overlaid with 0.5 ml of DMEM containing 100 mg/ml of ampicillin and 50 mg/ml of kanamycin at 37 °C for 0, 4, and 24 h. At the end of the incubation period, the culture medium was removed and centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 15 min. The cell pellet and adherent cells were resuspended in TRIzol. Total RNA were extracted from the cells at 0, 4 and 24 h post infection.

