TITLE
Characteristic expression of major histocompatibility complex and immune privilege genes in human pluripotent stem cells and the derivatives

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Pluripotent stem cells, including human embryonic stem (hES) and induced pluripotent stem (hiPS) cells, have been regarded as useful sources for cell?based transplantation therapy. However immunogenicity of the cells remains the major determinant for successful clinical application. We report the examination of several hES cell lines (NTU1 and H9), hiPS cell lines, and their derivatives (including stem cell?derived hepatocytes) for the expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC), natural killer (NK) cell receptor (NKp30, NKp44, NKp46) ligand, immune?related genes, human leukocyte antigen (HLA) haplotyping, and the effects in functional mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR). Flow cytometry showed lower levels (percentages and fluorescence intensities) of MHC class I (MHC?I) molecules, β2?microglobulin and HLA?E in undifferentiated stem cells, but the levels were increased after co?treatment with interferon gamma and/or in vitro differentiation. Antigen presenting cell markers (CD11c, CD80 and CD86) and MHC?II (HLA?DP, DQ and DR) remained low throughout the treatments. Recognitions of stem cells/derivatives by NK lysis receptors were lower or absent. Activation of responder lymphocytes was significantly lower by undifferentiated stem cells than by allogeneic lymphocytes in MLR, but differentiated NTU1 hES cells induced a cell number?dependent lymphocyte proliferation comparable with that by allogeneic lymphocytes. Interestingly activation of lymphocytes by differentiated hiPS cells or H9 cells became blunted at higher cell numbers. Real?time RT?PCR showed significant differential expression of immune privilege genes (TGF?β2, Arginase 2, Indole 1, GATA3, POMC, VIP, CALCA, CALCB, IL?1RN, CD95L, CR1L, Serpine 1, HMOX1, IL6, LGALS3, HEBP1, THBS1, CD59 and LGALS1) in pluripotent stem cells/derivatives when compared to somatic cells. It is concluded that pluripotent stem cells/derivatives are predicted to be immunogenic, though evidences suggest some levels of potential immune privilege. In addition, differential immunogenicity may exist between different pluripotent stem cell lines and their derivatives

