TITLE
Genomic aberrations in distant fields from oral potentially malignant lesions by high resolution DNA flow cytometry and array-CGH

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The aim of the study was to address the concept of field cancerization in oral cancer. The presence of genomic aberrations, indicative of chromosomal instability (CIN), in oral distant fields (ODFs) of visually normal and non-dysplastic mucosa at the mirror image from concomitant oral potentially malignant lesions (OPMLs) was investigated. This pilot study comprised 16 OPMLs (8 without dysplasia, nd-OPMLs; 8 with dysplasia, d-OPMLs) and 16 ODFs. DNA diploid (DNA Index, DI=1) and aneuploid (DI≠1) sublines were detected by high resolution DNA-flow cytometry (FCM) at (hr DNA-FCM) using DAPI stained nuclei suspensions. Nuclei with different DIs were FCM-sorted in order to enrich the epithelial component and to obtain genomic DNA for high resolution oligonucleotide array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization (a-CGH) analysis to provide a genome-wide measurement of DNA copy number aberrations (CNAs). The frequencies of DNA aneuploidy in ODFs and OPMLs were 6.2% and 43.8%, respectively (p=0.037). ODFs and nd-OPMLs were all near-diploid (DI≠1 and DI≤1.4), while d-OPMLs were also high-aneuploid (DI > 1.4). CNA averages were 2.3 in ODFs (1.5 for nd-OPMLs and 3.1 for d-OPMLs), and 7.325 in OPMLs (3.0 in nd-OPMLs; 11.6 in d-OPMLs). CNAs were present in the DNA diploid sublines and often the same CNAs were observed in both ODFs and corresponding OPMLs DNA aneuploid sublines and CNAs in the present series of 16 ODFs are likely to represent early events of the natural history of oral carcinogenesis and to indicate an early onset of the field effect cancerization. Moreover, gains within 20q13.33-qter, 7p22.2-pter and 16p13.3-pter chromosomal regions in ODFs and in the relative OPMLs suggest that specific genes localized in these regions (RTEL1, MAD1L1 and TEL2) might contribute to the ODF/d-OPML transition.

DESIGN
We analyzed: 8 samples of oral potentially malignant lesions with dysplasia, 8 samples of oral potentially malignant lesions without dysplasia and for each patient a corresponding  oral distant field of visually normal mucosa.

