TITLE
Xenograft model systems of adenoid cystic carcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is one of the most common malignancies that arise in the salivary glands, with an incidence of 4.5 per 1,000,000. It can also arise in glandular tissue closely related to salivary glands in the lacrimal gland, nasal passages and tracheobronchial tree, as well as in glands of the breast and vulva. At all of these sites, it is characterized by a distinctive histology of basaloid epithelial cells arranged in cribriform or tubular patterns, usually demonstrating abundant hyaline extracellular matrix secretion and some degree of myoepithelial differentiation. ACC is generally a slow-growing tumor characterized by a protracted clinical course, usually well over 5 years in duration, marked by regional recurrence, distant metastasis and/or spread along peripheral nerves. A recurrent chromosomal translocation, t(6;9)(q23;p21), has been identified in ACC, and recently it has been discovered that in a majority of ACC the MYB gene on chromosome 6 is fused to the 3’ terminus of the NFIB gene on chromosome 9, creating a fusion gene product resulting in increased MYB-related transcriptional activation.    Recently it has been determined that most cell lines with attribution of ACC derivation are either contaminants of other cell lines or do not have the characteristic MYB-NFIB translocation. Also, there are no animal models of this histologically and genetically defined tumor type. To address the paucity of experimental and pre-clinical models systems of ACC, we have for several years been establishing xenograft tumor lines from clinical samples of ACC. We describe our experience with these models and their characterization here.

DESIGN
Analysis of 12 xenografts of human adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) along with 10 samples of ACC directly from humans. Note, that 12 of these samples are paired primary ACC & xenograft ACC  from the same individual (6 pairs in total).

