TITLE
Role of intracellular calcium in Drosophila larval growth and viability

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Intracellular Ca2+ release through the Inositol 1,4,5-Triphosphate Receptor (InsP3R) is a feature of all multicellular organisms in which it shapes the temporal and spatial aspects of calcium signaling in cells, affecting several developmental and physiological processes. Mutants in the InsP3R gene of Drosophila (itpr) exhibit a range of defects which include growth defects and larval lethality.The Drosophila Insulin-like peptides (ILPs) are encoded by multigene families that are expressed in the brain and other tissues. Upon secretion, these peptides likely serve as hormones, neurotransmitters, and growth factors. In Drosophila melanogaster, molecular genetic studies have revealed Drosophila ILPs as elements of a conserved insulin signaling pathway, and as in other animal models, it appears to play a key role in metabolism, growth, reproduction, and aging. Previous work from our group has shown that InsP3R function can be rescued by ectopically expressing InsP3R in dilp cells  or can be compensated by altering the activity of Sarco-Endoplasmic Reticulum Calcium-ATPase (SERCA). To understand the molecular basis of larval lethality and growth defect in Drosophila InsP3R mutants and to decipher possible cross talk of itpr gene with other signaling pathways we have carried out genome wide microarray experiments. We have compared the transcript profiles of i) itpr mutant larvae and wild type larvae, ii) dilp rescue larvae with itpr mutant larvae iii) itpr and SERCA double mutant larvae with itpr mutant larvae. By this we have identified genes whose levels are altered in itpr mutants and are restored towards wild type in dilp rescue larvae with itpr mutant larvae and itpr and SERCA double mutants. Our experiments help in identify genes that are regulated by changes in intracellular Ca2+ in the context of larval viability may contribute to the better understanding of the major human pathologies caused by calcium misbalance or by dysregulation of the insulin/IGF pathway.

DESIGN
The 8x60k array AMADID: 27326 slide was scanned immediately by PerkinElmer Scan array Gx Microarray scanner. The Scan array software (PerkinElmer) was used for grid wise normalization of array images. Three were used with Mutant, three for Dilp Rescue and two for Kum Rescue experiments . The data was analysed by GeneSpring GX Agilent . The differential expression was considered if the Log 2 mean of at least -1 for the down regulated genes and +1 for the upregulated genes. We considered only the genes that were reproducible from biological triplicates for Mutant, biological treplicates for Dilp Rescue and biological duplicates for Kum Rescue.

