TITLE
Glyco gene profiling of two Hela cell lines to help identify NKp30L expressed on tumoral cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
NKp30 is one of the first NK-specific triggering receptor involved in tumour cell lysis to be identified. It is part of the so-called Natural Cytotoxicity Receptors (NCRs) also including NKp44, NKp46 and NKp80 (Bottino, 2005). Human NKp30 is a 190 amino-acids transmembrane protein with an extracellular V-type Ig-like domain containing two putative N-glycosylation sites (Pende, 1999). Three alternative splices can yield three different intracellular domains. An additional alternative splice can induce the deletion of 25 AA in the extracellular domain leading to the formation of a predicted C2-type Ig-like domain instead of a V-type Ig-like domain (Hollyoake, 2005; Neville, 1999). Dr. Romagne lab's aim is to identify NKp30L expressed on tumoral cells. Preliminary Results: Two in vitro systems allow us to detect the NKp30L on the surface of target cells. The first reporter system is a reporter cell line expressing a NKp30 chimeric protein. Upon engagement of this chimeric protein with the NKp30L, cell activation specific for this interaction is measured. The second reporter systems uses the NKp30Fc recombinant protein as a detection tool or eventually as a blocking reagent. It is made with the sequence encoding the V-type Ig-like domain of NKp30. Work to qualify and define cell lines for the expression of NKp30L was carried out in order to identify in our two reporter systems the best cells lines to use. We finally identified the Hela EV2 and Hela PF cell lines as a positive and negative for NKp30L respectively whereas other NK receptor ligands expression is identical in these two cells lines. The NKp30L is sensitive to trypsin digestion and to PNGase F digestion in the NKp30Fc FACS staining assay. These results indicate that at least one NKp30L is probably a N-Glycan carried by a trypsin-sensitive protein at the cell surface. We performed a glycan gene expression profiling of these two Hela cell lines as this will be of major importance to help characterizing the differences in glycans between these two variants of Hela cells and the nature of the NKp30L.

DESIGN
RNA preparations of Hela EV2 and Hela cells from EV23, EV2B, EV2III(positive) and PF4, PFB, PFIII (negative) cells were sent to the Microarray Core (E). The RNA was amplified, labeled, and hybridized to the GLYCOv3 microarrays.

