TITLE
Programming human pluripotent stem cells into adipocytes [Affymetrix]

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The utility of human pluripotent stem cells as a tool for understanding disease and as a renewable source of cells for transplantation therapies is dependent on efficient differentiation protocols that convert these cells into relevant adult cell types. Here we report the robust and efficient differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into adipocytes. We found that inducible expression of PPARG2 in pluripotent stem cell-derived mesenchymal progenitor cells programmed their development towards an adipocyte cell fate. Using this approach, multiple human pluripotent cell lines were differentiated into adipocytes with efficiencies of 85% to 90%. These pluripotent stem cell-derived adipocytes retained their identity independent of transgene expression, could be maintained in culture for several weeks, expressed mature markers, and exhibited mature functional properties such as lipid catabolism in response to a beta-adrenergic stimulus. Global transcriptional and lipid metabolomic analyses further confirmed the identity and maturity of these pluripotent stem cell-derived adipocytes.

DESIGN
Mesenchymal progenitor cells (MPCs) derived from human embryonic stem cells hESCs and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) along with adipose-derived stromal vascular cells (ADSVCs) were subjected to induction of PPAR2 and compared to primary fat samples. Overall 2 ADSVC (ADSVC 24 nd 49) lines, 1 hESC (HUES9) line and 1 iPSC (BJRiPS) line were differentiated into MPCs, PPAR2 programmed, and compared to untreated MPCs and primary fat samples from 2 individuals. Each condition is either represented in duplicate or triplicate on affymetrix HuGene-1_0-st arrays. MPCs derived from the hESC lines HUES2 and HUES8, ADSVCs, and BJRiPS were also run on a separate platform (HG-U133_Plus_2) with more GEO presence to facilitate analysis (34 samples, two platforms total). Supplementary file(s): GeneSymbol-collapsed data represent the final normalized data used for analyses in the manuscript.

