TITLE
Epithelial Expression of Toll-like Receptor 5 is Modulated in Healthy Smokers and Smokers with Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The toll-like receptors (TLRs) are important components of the respiratory epithelium host innate defense, enabling the airway surface to recognize and respond to a variety of insults in inhaled air. Based on the knowledge that smokers are more susceptible to pulmonary infection and the airway epithelium of smokers with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by bacterial colonization and acute exacerbation of airway infections, we assessed whether smoking alters the expression of TLRs in human small airway epithelium, the primary site of smoking-induced disease. Microarrays were used to survey the TLR family gene expression in small airway (10th-12th order) epithelium from healthy nonsmokers (n=60), healthy smokers (n=73) and smokers with COPD (n=36). Using the criteria of detection call of present in ≥50%, 6 of 10 TLRs (1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 8) were expressed. Compared to nonsmokers, the most strikingly changed gene is TLR5, which down-regulated in healthy smokers (1.4-fold decrease, p < 10-13) and in smokers with COPD (1.6-fold, p < 10-14). TaqMan RT-PCR confirmed these observations. Bronchial biopsies immunofluorescence showed that TLR5 protein was expressed mainly on the apical side of the human airway epithelium and decreased in healthy smokers and smokers with COPD. In vitro studies showed that the level of TLR5 downstream genes, IL-6 and IL-8 were highly induced in TLR5 high-expressing cells compared to TLR5 low-expressing cells after flagellin exposure. In the context that TLR5 functions to recognize pathogens and activate innate immune responses, the smoking-induced down-regulation of TLR5 likely contributes to smoking-related susceptibility to airway infection.

DESIGN
The toll-like receptors (TLRs) are important components of the respiratory epithelium host innate defense. Microarrays were used to survey the TLR family gene expression in small airway (10th-12th order) epithelium from healthy nonsmokers (n=60), healthy smokers (n=73) and smokers with COPD (n=36). Using the criteria of detection call of present in ≥50%, 6 of 10 TLRs (1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 8) were expressed. Compared to nonsmokers, the most strikingly changed gene is TLR5, which down-regulated in healthy smokers (1.4-fold decrease, p < 10-13) and in smokers with COPD (1.6-fold, p < 10-14). In the context that TLR5 functions to recognize pathogens and activate innate immune responses, the smoking-induced down-regulation of TLR5 likely contributes to smoking-related susceptibility to airway infection. *** Processed data not provided for all gene expression records. ***

