TITLE
RNA processing in Bacillus subtilis: Identification of targets of the essential RNase Y

ORGANISM
Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis str. 168

SUMMARY
RNA processing and degradation is initiated by endonucleolytic cleavage of the target RNAs. In many bacteria, this activity is performed by RNase E which is not present in Bacillus subtilis and other Gram-positive bacteria. Recently, the essential endoribonuclease RNase Y has been discovered in B. subtilis. This RNase is involved in the degradation of bulk mRNA suggesting a major role in mRNA metabolism. However, only a few targets of RNase Y have been identified so far. In order to assess the global impact of RNase Y, we compared the transcriptomes of strains expressing RNase Y or depleted for RNase Y. Our results indicate that processing by RNase Y results in accumulation of about 80 mRNAs. Some of these targets were substantially stabilized by RNase Y depletion, resulting in half-lives in the range of an hour. Moreover, about 40 mRNAs were less abundant when RNase Y was depleted among them the mRNAs of the operons required for biofilm formation. Interestingly, overexpression of RNase Y was sufficient to induce biofilm formation. The results emphasize the importance of RNase Y for B. subtilis and are in support of the idea that RNase Y is the functional equivalent of RNase E.

DESIGN
To study the global function of RNase Y, a microarray analysis was performed with a B. subtilis strain allowing controlled depletion of RNase Y. Strain GP193 (Commichau et al., 2009, Mol. Cell. Proteomics 8: 1350-1360) expressing the rny gene under the control of a xylose-inducible promoter was cultivated in CSE minimal medium in the presence or absence of the inducer xylose. The transcriptomes of the two cultures (i.e. expressing RNase Y and depleted for RNase Y) were compared at a timepoint at which the reduced RNase Y amounts already affected the mRNA turnover whereas the growth rates of the two cultures were still almost identical.

