TITLE
[E-MTAB-475] Trypanosoma vivax Y486 bloodstream stage RNAseq

ORGANISM
Trypanosoma vivax

SUMMARY
Trypanosoma vivax is a vector-borne blood parasite of cattle throughout sub-saharan Africa. For some years the genome sequence of this organism has been in development at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute and is shortly to be completed. Analysis of the genome has revealed various putative genes encoding unknown proteins. In an effort to validate these features we will sequence mRNA transcripts from the bloodstream stage of the genome strain Y486. Most of the novel gene families identified from the genome sequence are too diverse to be validated individually, i.e. through RT-PCR, so it is necessary to sequence all cellular transcripts. We hope to confirm the transcription of one or all members of the novel gene families from the resulting transcriptome. While essential for the scientific rigour of the present genome project, this transcriptome will also provide an additional resource for the longer-term benefit of the research community. ArrayExpress Release Date: 2011-02-16 Person Roles:  submitter Person Last Name: Quan Person First Name: Lin Person Mid Initials: Person Email: ql3@sanger.ac.uk Person Phone: 01223 834244 Person Address: Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,Hinxton,Cambridge. CB10 1SA UK Person Affiliation: Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute Person Roles:  Investigator Person Last Name: Jackson Person First Name: Andrew Person Mid Initials: P Person Email: aj4@sanger.ac.uk Person Phone: 01223 834244 Person Address: Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,Hinxton,Cambridge. CB10 1SA UK Person Affiliation: Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute Person Roles:  Project Coordinator Person Last Name: Sanders Person First Name: Mandy Person Mid Initials: J Person Email: mjs@sanger.ac.uk Person Phone: 01223 834244 Person Address: Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,Hinxton,Cambridge. CB10 1SA UK Person Affiliation: Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

DESIGN
Experimental Design: genotype_design Experimental Design: in_vivo_design Experimental Design: is_expressed_design Experimental Design: transcript_identification_design Experimental Factor Name: StrainOrLine Experimental Factor Type: StrainOrLine

