TITLE
Establishment of Enhancer Repertoires that Orchestrate the Myeloid and Lymphoid Cell Fates (gene expression dataset 1)

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Recent studies have documented genome-wide binding patterns of transcriptional regulators and their associated epigenetic marks in hematopoietic cell lineages. In order to determine how epigenetic marks are established and maintained during developmental progression, we have generated long-term cultures of hematopoietic progenitors by enforcing the expression of the E-protein antagonist Id2. Hematopoietic progenitors that express Id2 are multipotent and readily differentiate upon withdrawal of Id2 expression into committed B lineage cells, thus indicating a causative role for E2A in promoting the B cell fate. Genome-wide analyses revealed that a substantial fraction of lymphoid and myeloid enhancers are pre-marked by H3K4me1 in multipotent progenitors. However, H3K4me1 levels at a subset of enhancers are elevated during developmental progression, resulting in evolving enhancer repertoires that we propose orchestrate the myeloid and B cell fates.

DESIGN
ChIP-Seq and gene expression profiling were performed in an inducible hematopoietic pluripotent cell line that can be differentiated into multiple lymphoid lineages. This submission contains gene expression profiling data. To characterize Id2-HPCs, we performed microarray analysis using RNA derived from cultured E2A-deficient cells, EBF-deficient cells and Id2-HPCs. Id2-HPC cells were cultured in IMDM medium supplemented with 10% FCS/2% PSG/β-me and IL7, Flt3-ligand, and SCF cytokines on S17 feeder cells in a humidified incubator at 37 degrees C with 5% CO2. Id2-HPC expanded cells were depleted of small ( < 1-5%) numbers of CD19-, CD25- and CD11b-positive cells by auto-MACS. E2A -/- and EBF -/- cells were cultured in IMDM supplemented with 10% FCS/2% PSG/β-me on S17 feeder cells in the presence of IL-7, Flt3-ligand, and SCF cytokines in a humidified incubator at 37 degree C with 5% CO2.

