TITLE
Mesenchymal Stem Cells Promote the Sustained Expression of CD69 on Activated T-lymphocytes: Roles of Canonical and Non-Canonical NF-κB Signaling

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are known to induce the conversion of activated T-cells into regulatory T-cells in vitro. The marker CD69 is a target of canonical NF-κB signaling and is transiently expressed upon activation; however, stable CD69 expression defines cells with immunoregulatory properties. Given its enormous therapeutic potential, we explored the molecular mechanisms underlying the induction of regulatory cells by MSCs. Peripheral blood CD3+ T-cells were activated and cultured in the presence or absence of MSCs. CD4+ cell mRNA expression was then characterized by microarray analysis. The drug BAY11-7082 and a siRNA against RELB were used to explore the differential roles of canonical and non-canonical NF-κB signaling, respectively. Flow cytometry and real-time PCR were used for analyses. Genes with immunoregulatory functions, CD69 and non-canonical NF-κB subunits (RELB and NFKB2) were all expressed at higher levels in lymphocytes co-cultured with MSCs. The frequency of CD69+ cells among lymphocytes cultured alone progressively decreased after activation. In contrast, the frequency of CD69+ cells increased significantly following activation in lymphocytes co-cultured with MSCs. Inhibition of canonical NF-κB signaling by BAY immediately following activation blocked the induction of CD69; however, inhibition of canonical NF-κB signaling on the 3rd day further induced the expression of CD69. Furthermore, late expression of CD69 was inhibited by RELB siRNA. These results indicate that the canonical NF-κB pathway controls the early expression of CD69 after activation; however, in an immunoregulatory context, late and sustained CD69 expression is promoted by the non-canonical pathway and is inhibited by canonical NF-κB signaling.

DESIGN
In order to study the molecular basis by which Multipotent Mesenchymal Stromal/Stem Cells (MSC) exert their immune regulatory function, immunomagnetically purified CD3+ T-cells from the peripheral blood of 3 individuals were activated and cultured in the presence or absence of MSCs. Following 5 days, CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells were further immunomagnetically selected and their gene expression profiles were obtained by microarrays and compared. Paired samples from 3 individuals were used for this analysis.

