TITLE
Over-expression of miR-18b is associated with the grade of malignancy of hepatocallular carcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Aberrant expression of microRNA (miRNA) is closely associated with carcinogenesis. The malignancy of the hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is prescribed in the degree of histological differentiation. Poorly differentiated HCC is generally more malignant prognosis than well differentiated HCC. We analyzed the miRNA expression profiles in 110 HCC (60 moderately differentiated, 30 poorly differentiated, and 20 well differentiated HCC) by using microarray in order to establish the novel biomarker for the degree of histological differentiation and forecasting relapse of HCC. The expression level of 12 miRNAs was significantly different according to the degree of histological differentiation. The expression level of miR-18b in poorly differentiated HCC was significantly higher than that in well differentiated HCC. Based on the target search algorithm and argonaute 2 (Ago2) immunoprecipitation study for target binding assay, miR-18b can control the expression of trinucleotide repeat containing 6B (TNRC6B) as a target. Over expression of miR-18b and down regulation of TNRC6B accelerated the activity of cell proliferation and lost ability of cell adhesion in two hepatoma cell lines. Low expression of miR-18b is significantly decreased the relapse free rate after surgical resection. In conclusion, expression pattern of miR-18b is a marker of an important determinant in the control of cell proliferation and adhesion and also prediction of clinical course. From a clinical point of view, our study emphasizes miR-18b as a diagnostic and prognostic marker for HCC progression.

DESIGN
In order to establish the novel biomarker for the degree of histological differentiation and forecasting relapse of HCC with HCV positive, we analyzed the miRNA expression profiles in 110 surgically resected hepatocellular carcinoma (60 moderately differentiated, 30 poorly differentiated, and 20 well differentiated HCC).

