TITLE
Molecular signatures of peripheral blood mononuclear cells following chronic IFN-alpha: Relationship of OAS2 with Depression and Fatigue

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Interferon (IFN)-alpha causes high rates of depression and fatigue, and is used to investigate the impact of innate immune cytokines on brain and behavior. However, little is known about transcriptional profiles of circulating immune cells during chronic IFN-alpha administration. Accordingly, genome-wide transcriptional profiling was performed on peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 21 patients with chronic hepatitis C virus either awaiting IFN-alpha therapy (n=10) or after 12 weeks of IFN-alpha treatment (n=11). Significance analysis of microarray data identified 252 up-regulated gene transcripts, the majority of which were related to IFN-alpha/antiviral or innate-immune/inflammatory signaling. Of these upregulated genes, 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase 2 (OAS2) was the only gene that was differentially expressed in patients that developed IFN-alpha-induced depression/fatigue, and correlated with depression and fatigue scores at 12 weeks of IFN-alpha administration. Promoter-based bioinformatic and cellular origin analyses revealed IFN-alpha-induced increases in genes bearing transcription factor binding motifs (TFBMs) related to myeloid differentiation, IFN-alpha signaling, API and CREB/ATF family of transcription pathways, with changes derived primarily from monocytes and plasmacytoid dendritic cells. Patients with high depression/fatigue scores demonstrated up-regulation of genes bearing TFBMs for myeloid differentiation, IFN-alpha and AP1 signaling, and down regulation of TFBMs for CREB/ATF-related transcription factors. Cellular origin analyses indicated a shift toward genes derived from CD8+T and NK cells in subjects with high depression/fatigue scores. These results reveal an antiviral and inflammatory transcriptional profile after 12 weeks IFN-alpha, accompanied by increased OAS2 expression, decreased CREB/ATF transcriptional control, and a shift from monocyte-derived genes to those of cytotoxic lymphocytes in IFN-alpha-induced depression/fatigue.

DESIGN
Total RNA was isolated from the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) obtained at 12 weeks from HCV patients treated with IFN-alpha plus ribavirin (n=11) and untreated HCV patients awaiting IFN-alpha/ribavirin therapy (control subjects, n=10).

