TITLE
Histone Modifications by ChIP-seq from ENCODE/Stanford/Yale/Davis/Harvard

ORGANISM
ENCODE

SUMMARY
This data was generated by ENCODE. If you have questions about the data, contact the submitting laboratory directly (Peggy Farnham for questions concerning data collection and usage and Philip Cayting for data scoring and submission inquiries). If you have questions about the Genome Browser track associated with this data, contact ENCODE ( ). This track, produced as part of the ENCODE Project, displays maps of histone modifications genome-wide using ChIP-seq in different cell lines. The ChIP-seq method involves first using formaldehyde to cross-link histones and other DNA-associated proteins to genomic DNA within cells. The cross-linked chromatin is subsequently extracted, sheared, and immunoprecipitated using specific antibodies. After reversal of cross-links, the immunoprecipitated DNA is sequenced and mapped to the human reference genome. The relative enrichment of each antibody-target (epitope) across the genome is inferred from the density of mapped fragments. Chemical modifications (e.g. methylation or acetylation) of the histone proteins present in chromatin influence gene expression by changing how accessible the chromatin is to transcription factors. Shown for each experiment (defined as a particular antibody and a particular cell type) is a track of enrichment for the specifically modified histone (Signal), along with sites that have the greatest enrichment (Peaks). Also included for each cell type is the input signal, which represents the control condition where no antibody targeting was performed. In general the following chemical modifications have associated genetic phenotypes: H3K4me3 and H3K9Ac are considered to be marks of active or potentially active promoter regions. H3K4me1 and H3K27Ac are considered to be marks of active or potentially active enhancer regions. H3K36me3 and H3K79me2 are considered to be marks of transcriptional elongation. H3K27me3 and H3K9me3 are considered to be marks of inactive regions. For data usage terms and conditions, please refer to and

