TITLE
Microarrays reveal oocyte lipid storage droplet gene as key factor in reproductive dysfunction of captive-reared  P. monodon

ORGANISM
Penaeus monodon

SUMMARY
Background: Aquaculture of the black tiger prawn Penaeus monodon remains severely constrained by an almost total dependence on wild-caught broodstock. Reliance on wild-caught broodstock stems, for the most part, from reduced reproductive potential of captive-reared females. Reproductive performance of captive-reared females is usually characterised by longer latency period, lower egg production, egg hatch rates and post-larval survivorship compared with their wild-caught counterparts. Improved understanding of the cellular and associated molecular events occurring during peneaid ovarian maturation could therefore be fundamental to improving reproductive success of captive-reared animals. Methodology/Principle Findings: In support of other studies, our histological analyses of developing oocytes revealed differences between wild-caught and captive-reared P. monodon, including reduced lipid accumulation in oocytes of captive-reared animals. We have employed oligonucleotide microarray analysis to compare expression profiles of genes involved in ovarian maturation among wild-caught and captive-reared animals. Custom oligonucleotide microarrays were constructed and screened with transcripts derived from the ovary, cephalothorax and eyestalk from animals of all ovarian maturation stages. Ovarian maturation-related differential expression patterns were observed for 111 transcripts, with 53 transcripts displaying differential expression between wild-caught and captive-reared animals. Notably transcripts encoding vitellogenin - the major egg yolk protein precursor, and a lipid storage droplet protein (which we named pmLSD) which is involved in lipid accumulation, were found to be more highly expressed in wild-caught animals. pmLSD transcripts localise to pre-vitellogenic oocytes of wild-caught animals and the pmLSD protein is exclusively localised to the surface of lipid droplets of oocytes at vitellogenic and cortical rod stages.

DESIGN
We have employed oligonucleotide microarray analysis to compare expression profiles of genes involved in ovarian maturation among wild-caught and captive-reared animals.  Target preparation and microarray hybridisation. Ovarian RNA samples from nine wild-caught  animals representing six ovarian maturation stages (P, 2, 24, V, R, E) were used in microarray  hybridisations. Similarly, RNA samples from three captive-reared animals representing four maturation  stages (P, 24, V, E) were used in microarray hybridisations. For wild-caught animals, samples from  each ovarian maturation stage were pooled into groups of four and five, enabling two hybridisations.  For captive-reared animals, samples from each ovarian maturation stage from all three animals were  pooled enabling one hybridisation for each stage. Importantly, as the four stages for captive-reared  animals were (1) pre-ablation pre-vitellogenic, (2) post-ablation pre-vitellogenic, (3) post-ablation  vitellogenic, (4) post-ablation vitellogenic with cortical rods, this arrangement allowed for 2 samples of  captive-reared pre-vitellogenic and 2 samples of captive-reared vitellogenic, thereby enabling t-tests  between samples, while also allowing analysis across the whole 4 stages via cluster analysis. All  hybridisations were single channel hybridisations conducted using equal amounts of RNA pooled from  each individual.

