TITLE
Identification of potential biomarkers for patients with neurodegenerative parkinsonian syndromes using serum cytokine microarray analysis; series 7

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: Microarray technology may offer a new opportunity to gain insight into disease-specific global protein expression profiles. The present study was performed to apply a serum cytokine-array to screen for potential molecular biomarkers for Parkinson's disease (PD), multiple system atrophy (MSA), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal syndrome (CBS). Methodology/Principal Findings: Serum samples were obtained from patients with clinical diagnoses of PD (n=117), MSA (n=31) and PSP/CBS (n=38) and 99 controls. Cytokine profiles of sera of patients and controls were analyzed with a semiquantitative human cytokine antibody array. In a next step, significantly altered cytokines were individually validated by immunoassays. The cytokine array revealed a significantly altered expression of 12 cytokines. Immunoassay validation confirmed a significant increase of PDGF-BB in PSP/CBS, MSA and PD and a decrease of Prolactin in PD (Kruskal-Wallis p < 0.05). A multivariate analysis taking into account diagnoses anti-Parkinsonian treatment, sex and age revealed that PDGF-BB levels were influenced only by the diagnoses (p < 0.001), whereas Prolactin levels were influenced only by anti-Parkinsonian treatment (p < 0.001). These findings could be corroborated by a subgroup analysis in untreated patients. Conclusions/Significance: In our unbiased cytokine array screening approach we found PDGF-BB to be elevated in PSP/CBS, MSA and PD. Increased PDGF-BB levels might be of relevance in a model of molecular biomarkers for Parkinsonian syndromes.

DESIGN
Screen serum samples from patients with Parkinson's disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal syndrome, multisystem atrophy and controls for deregulation of serum proteins using a cytokine-array detecting 174 secreted signaling proteins.

