TITLE
Multicilin promotes centriole assembly and ciliogenesis during multiciliate cell differentiation.

ORGANISM
Xenopus laevis

SUMMARY
Analysis of epithelial explants injected with the intracellular domain of Notch (ICD) alone, to block the formation of multiciliate cells, or with Dexamethasone inducible Multicilin (MCI-HGR) to induce the formation of ectopic multiciliate cells.  MCI-HGR plus ICD injected samples were compared to ICD alone to identify candidate genes whose expression changes when MCI is active. Epithelial cells projecting hundreds of motile cilia are prominent in the respiratory system, brain ependyma and female reproductive tract where they generate a vigorous fluid flow along luminal surfaces.  Despite their importance for organ function, how multiciliate cells arise developmentally in diverse epithelia is poorly understood. We identified a novel coiled-coil protein, we have termed multicilin (MCI), whose expression is Notch regulated and restricted to epithelia where multiciliate cells form in Xenopus embryos. In order to identify early downstream targets of multicilin we blocked the formation of endogenous multiciliate cells by injecting ICD mRNA.  In a subset of samples we then misexpressed a dexamethasone inducible form of MCI (MCI-HGR) to identify specific targets of MCI in explants of Xenopus epithelium. In explants expressing MCI-HGR genes specifically expressed in ciliated cells such as FoxJ1 and alpha-tubulin were highly upregulated along with various genes known to be required for ciliogenesis, and a large number of genes likely to be part of the ciliome based on homology of potential structural motifs.

DESIGN
2-cell stage Xenopus embryos were injected with synthetic mRNA encoding ICD or ICD along with MCI-HGR.  At stage 9/10 the presumptive ectoderm was cut off the embryo and cultured on a fibronectin coated coverslip.  At stage 11.5 dexamethasone was added to all conditions to induce MCI.  Explants were harvested 5 hours after adding dexamethasone (approximately stage14) and used as the starting material for arrays.

