TITLE
Identification of Candidate Tumor Suppressor Genes Inactivated by Promoter Methylation in Melanoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) are sometimes inactivated by transcriptional silencing through promoter hypermethylation. To identify novel methylated TSGs in melanoma, we carried out global mRNA expression proﬁling on a panel of 12 melanoma cell lines treated with a combination of 5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine (5AzadC) and an inhibitor of histone deacetylase, Trichostatin A. Reactivation of gene expression after drug treatment was assessed using Illumina whole-genome microarrays. After qRT-PCR conﬁrmation, we followed up 8 genes (AKAP12, ARHGEF16, ARHGAP27, ENC1, PPP1R3C, PPP1R14C, RARRES1, and TP53INP1) by quantitative DNA methylation analysis using mass spectrometry of base-speciﬁc cleaved ampliﬁcation products in panels of melanoma cell lines and fresh tumors. PPP1R3C, ENC1, RARRES1, and TP53INP1, showed reduced mRNA expression in 35–59% of the melanoma cell lines compared to melanocytes and which was correlated with a high proportion of promoter methylation ( > 40–60%). The same genes also showed extensive promoter methylation in 6–25% of the tumor samples, thus conﬁrming them as novel candidate TSGs in melanoma.

DESIGN
We sought to identify melanoma TSGs silenced by promoter methylation by carrying out an array-based analysis in a well-annotated panel of 12 cell lines after combined treatment with 5AzadC and an inhibitor of histone deacetylase, Trichostatin A (TSA). Expression profiles were generated for each cell line before and after drug treatment using Illumina Sentrix Human-6 Expression version 2 BeadChips. Genes   reactivated   in   all   12   cell   lines   were removed  from  further  analysis  since  they  are likely responding to drug treatment as part of the ‘‘cellular  stress  response,’’  or  due  to  promoter demethylation of genes normally silenced in the melanocytic lineage. Genes were further ﬁltered to  identify  those  with  an  average  of > 4-fold increased  expression  in  at  least  four  samples  in the panel of 12 lines and > 10-fold increase in at least one of the cell lines.

