TITLE
Identification of novel tissue-specific transcription arising from E-cadherin/CDH1 intron2: a novel protein isoform increases gastric cancer cell invasion and angiogenesis.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
E-cadherin, a protein encoded by the CDH1 gene is the dominant epithelial cell adhesion molecule playing a crucial role in epithelial tissue polarity and structural integrity. The progression of 90% or more carcinomas is believed to be mediated by disruption of normal E-cadherin expression, subcellular localization or function. Despite the strong correlation between E-cadherin loss and malignancy the mechanism through how this occurs is not known in most sporadic and hereditary epithelial carcinomas. Previous works have shown the importance of CDH1 intron 2 sequences for proper gene and protein expression supporting the possibility of these being cis-modulators of E-cadherin expression/function. but when co-expressed it led to reduced cell-cell adhesiveness, increased invasion and angiogenesis. By expression array analysis, IFITM1 and IFI27 levels were found to be increased upon CDH1a overexpression. Importantly, CDH1a was found to be de novo expressed in gastric cancer cell lines when compared to normal stomach. Results: In this sense we have searched for additional CDH1 transcripts arising from intron 2. From the four found, one (CDH1a) was demonstrated to be tissue specific and to be translated in vivo. When overexpressed in an E-cadherin negative context CDH1a replaced the canonic protein functions Conclusions: We have demonstrated, for the first time, transcripts arising from CDH1 intron 2. One of these, CDH1a, was found to modulate E-cadherin function representing a novel mechanism underlying invasion and angiogenesis in epithelial cancers and opening the way for novel therapeutic approaches.

DESIGN
Total RNA obtained from human gastric tubular adenocarcinoma Mkn28 cell line. Three independent replicas of each conditions(i.e  pLenti transduced cell lines overexpressing CDH1a , pLenti with empty vector and pLenti transduced cell lines overexpressing wild type CDH1) has been employed.

