TITLE
Salmonella Enteritidis strains from poultry show differential responses to stress and survival in the egg albumen

ORGANISM
Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Enteritidis

SUMMARY
Salmonella Enteritidis is the major food-borne pathogen primarily causing human infection through contaminated chicken meat and eggs. We recently demonstrated that S. Enteritidis strains from poultry differ in their ability to invade human intestinal cells and cause disease in orally challenged mice. Here we hypothesized that the differential pathogenicity of S. Enteritidis strains is due to the differential fitness in the adverse environments that may be encountered during infection in the host. The response of a panel of six S. Enteritidis strains to acid stress, oxidative stress, survival in egg albumen and the ability to cause infection in chickens were analyzed. This analysis allowed classification of strains into two categories: stress- sensitive and stress- resistant, with the former showing significantly (P < 0.05) reduced survival in acidic (gastric phase of infection) and oxidative (intestinal and systemic phase of infection) stress. Stress-sensitive strains also showed impaired intestinal colonization and systemic dissemination in orally inoculated chickens and failed to survive/grow in egg albumen. Comparative genomic hybridization microarray analysis revealed no differences at the discriminatory level of the whole gene content between stress-sensitive and stress-resistant strains. However, sequencing of rpoS, a stress-regulatory gene, revealed that one of the three stress-sensitive strains carried an insertion mutation in the rpoS resulting in truncation of σS. Finding that one of the stress-sensitive strains carried an easily identifiable small polymorphism within a stress-response gene suggests that the other strains may also have small polymorphisms elsewhere in the genome, which likely impact regulation of stress or virulence associated genes in some manner.

DESIGN
To determine if the differential stress response and virulence observed in this study could be due to the differences in the gene content between different strains, we compared the genomes of all the strains using CGH microarray designed based on the genomic information available for the sequenced strain.  All strains (n=6) were hybridized in triplicate.

