TITLE
The singing genome: Core and region enriched gene expression define behaviorally regulated gene networks

ORGANISM
Taeniopygia guttata

SUMMARY
Studies of transcriptional networks in multi-cellular organisms usually focus on isolated cells and typically assume that the discovered gene networks represent those present in connected cells within a complex organ like the brain. However, similar cell types connected in diverse anatomical networks could differentially influence transcriptional networks. Here, we used laser capture microdissection, expression arrays, genome mapping, and computational inference to explore behaviorally regulated gene networks in the brains of awake, behaving songbirds producing a skilled motor behavior, singing. We found that at baseline, in the absence of singing, a large proportion of genes (17%, > 3000) are differentially expressed in the different brain regions of the neural circuit that controls singing. These genes predominantly code for cell communication and connectivity proteins, and non-coding RNAs. Remarkably, the act of singing was associated with differential regulation of ~10% of the coding and non-coding genome. However, less than 1% of genes were singing-regulated in most brain regions and these were largely immediate early genes (IEGs), which peaked early, including the inducible transcription factors EGR1 and FOS. The remaining vast majority of behaviorally regulated gene expression was specific to one or a subset of brain regions, which peaked later. Promoters of the baseline, common, and diverse singing regulated gene clusters were enriched for different combinations of post-translationally activated transcription factors, like CREB, SRF, MEF2, MZF, and the IEG transcription factors. The results suggest that diverse cell-to-cell interactions and differential combinatorial binding of a small group of transcription factors may influence regional diversity of gene networks in seemingly similar cell types. Thus, in highly integrated neural circuits of intact behaving animals, transcriptional network diversity appears to be the rule, rather than the exception.

DESIGN
Gene expression in Area X, HVC, LMAN, and Ra was measured before singing (0) or after singing for 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7hours.  Four-Six independent experiments were performed at each of the 9 timepoints.

