TITLE
Gene expression in Citrus sinensis fruit tissues harvested from huanglongbing-infected trees: comparison with girdled fruit

ORGANISM
Citrus sinensis

SUMMARY
In this data set, we reported for the first time that huanglongbing disease (HLB) induces major changes in the expression of global genes in flavedo, vascular and juice vesicle tissues of citrus fruit.

DESIGN
68 Total samples were analyzed. cDNA generation, array analysis, and statistical tests were performed as a service at the Interdisciplinary Center for Biotechnology Research (ICBR) Microarray Core facility at the University of Florida (Gainesville, FL). The linear models were used for array analysis (Smyth GK et al. Bioinformatics, 2005, 2067-2075). The linear models were firstly used to assess differential expression, and then an empirical Bayes method was used to moderate the standard errors. 13 comparisons were performed for the study. The comparisons in Citrus sinensis cv. Hamlin included: SC vs. CC (genes that respond to infection in symptomatic vascular core); SJV vs. CJV (genes that respond to infection in symptomatic juice vesicle); SS vs. CS (genes that respond to infection in symptomatic seed); SP vs. CP (genes that respond to infection in symptomatic peel). The comparisons in Citrus sinensis cv. Valencia included: SP vs. HP (genes that respond to infection in symptomatic peel); ASP vs. HP (genes that respond to infection in asymptomatic peel); SP vs. ASP (genes that respond to infection in symptomatic peel compared to asymptomatic peel); SC vs. HC (genes that respond to infection in symptomatic vascular core); ASC vs. HC (genes that respond to infection in asymptomatic vascular core); SC vs. ASC (genes that respond to infection in symptomatic vascular core compared to asymptomatic vascular core); SJV vs. HJV (genes that respond to infection in symptomatic juice vesicle); ASJV vs. HJV (genes that respond to infection in asymptomatic juice vesicle); SJV vs. ASJV (genes that respond to infection in symptomatic juice vesicle compared to asymptomatic juice vesicle). ESTs with significant expression changes (P value < 0.001; false discovery rate < 0.01 with equal or higher than 2-fold changes in expression) were selected for further analysis.

