TITLE
Gene expression in Citrus sinensis (L.) Osbeck following infection with the bacterial pathogen Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus causing Huanglongbing in Florida

ORGANISM
Citrus sinensis

SUMMARY
Huanglongbing (HLB) (=citrus greening) is a destructive disease of citrus which is caused by a fastidious, phloem-inhabiting bacterium of the genus Candidatus Liberibacter.  Large-scale analysis of gene expression changes in ‘Valencia’ orange leaves were studied during the course of 19 weeks after inoculation with Ca. L. asiaticus using the Affymetrix GeneChip® citrus genome array to provide new insights into the molecular basis of citrus response to this pathogen.  Of the more than 33,000 probe sets on the microarray 21,067 were expressed in the leaves, of which 279 and 515 were differentially expressed (FDR ≤ 0.05) five to nine and 13-17 weeks after inoculation, respectively.  Results from semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis performed on 14 selected genes were highly correlated with those observed with the microarray.  Gene expression changes involved a variety of different processes including cell defense, transport, cellular organization, photosynthesis, and carbohydrate metabolism.  Notable was the pathogen-induced accumulation of transcripts for a phloem-specific lectin PP2-like protein.  Transcriptional changes and their relation to disease symptom development are discussed.  This is the first study of transcriptional profiling in citrus in response to liberibacter infection using microarray technology. Huanglongbing (HLB) is a destructive disease of citrus which is suspected to be caused by a phloem-inhabiting bacterium of the genus Candidatus Liberibacter.  Large-scale analysis of gene expression changes in ‘Valencia’ orange (C. sinensis) leaves were studied during the course of 19 weeks after inoculation with Ca. L. asiaticus (Las), the pathogen associated with HLB in Florida,  using the Affymetrix GeneChip® citrus genome array to provide new insights into the molecular basis of citrus response to this pathogen.

