TITLE
Gene expression profiles of myeloma cells treated with NAE inhibitor

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The transcriptional profile of the human multiple myeloma (MM) cell line MM.1S treated with MLN4924 vs control MM.1S cells was characterized by oligonucleotide microarray analysis, using the human U133 plus 2.0 Affymetrix GeneChip, according to previously described protocols for total RNA extraction and purification; cDNA synthesis; in vitro transcription reaction for production of biotin-labeled cRNA; hybridization of cRNA with U133plus2.0 Affymetrix gene chips; and scanning of image output files. Scanned image output files were analyzed using DNA-Chip Analyzer (dChip) (www.dchip.org), including conversion to DCP files, normalization and modeling. The gene expression profile of MM.1S cells for each time point of MLN4924 treatment was compared to the profile of control MM.1S cells. The NEDD8 activating enzyme (NAE) is upstream of the 20S proteasome in the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway and catalyzes the first step in the neddylation pathway. NEDD8 modification of cullins is required for ubiquitination of cullin-ring ligases (CRLs), which regulate degradation of a distinct subset of proteins. The more targeted impact of NAE on protein degradation prompted us to study MLN4924, an investigational NAE inhibitor, in preclinical multiple myeloma (MM) models. In vitro treatment with MLN4924 led to dose-dependent decrease of viability in a panel of human MM cell lines. In this analysis, we evaluated the molecular changes triggered in MM.1S myeloma cells by their in vitro treatment with MLN4924. The transcriptional profiles of each experimental condition were characterized by oligonucleotide microarray analysis, using the human U133 plus 2.0 Affymetrix GeneChip.

DESIGN
The human multiple myeloma (MM) cells MM.1S were cultured in vitro in the presence or absence of the NEDD8 activating enzyme (NAE) inhibitor MLN4924 for 8, 16 or 24hrs. The gene expression profiles of drug treated cells were compared with the profiles of control MM.1S cells.

