TITLE
Y. pestis KIM6+ TraSH Microarray Analysis After Intracellular Replication

ORGANISM
Yersinia pestis

SUMMARY
The transposon site hybridization (TraSH) technique (Sassetti, CM et al. 2001. PNAS 98:12712-7) was utilized to identify genes important for the survival of Y. pestis within murine macrophages.  A transposon library was created with ~31,500 Y. pestis KIM6+ insertion mutants.  A portion of the Y. pestis transposon insertion mutant library was used to infect BMMs and the surviving bacteria (output pool) were recovered.  TraSH was used to compare the output pool to a portion of the library that was not subjected to selection (input pool) in order to identify Y. pestis genes important for survival in macrophages.  Each end of the transposon used for mutagenesis contains an outward-reading T7 RNA polymerase promoter.  RNAs transcribed from the T7 promoters are complementary to the chromosomal DNA flanking each transposon in the library, so the RNAs can be used as “targets” to identify the approximate position of each transposon insertion in the mutant pool.   Differentially labeled targets generated from the output and input pools are competitively hybridized to the 70-mer oligonucleotide microarrays obtained from Pathogen Functional Genomics Resource Center/J. Craig Venter Institute.  Genes important for survival of Y. pestis in macrophages are identified by determining the ratio of the signal intensities for the output and input targets hybridizing to a given probe.

DESIGN
A transposon library was created with ~31,500 Y. pestis KIM6+ insertion mutants.  A portion of the Y. pestis transposon insertion mutant library was used to infect BMMs and the surviving bacteria (output pool) were recovered.  TraSH was used to compare the output pool to a portion of the library that was not subjected to selection (input pool).  Each end of the transposon used for mutagenesis contains an outward-reading T7 RNA polymerase promoter.  RNAs transcribed from the T7 promoters are complementary to the chromosomal DNA flanking each transposon in the library, so the RNAs was used as “targets” to identify the approximate position of each transposon insertion in the mutant pool.   Differentially labeled targets generated from the output and input pools are competitively hybridized to the 70-mer oligonucleotide microarrays obtained from Pathogen Functional Genomics Resource Center/J. Craig Venter Institute.  Genes important for survival of Y. pestis in macrophages are identified by determining the ratio of the signal intensities for the output and input targets hybridizing to a given probe.

