TITLE
Phenotypic and Genome-Wide Analysis of an Antibiotic-Resistant Small Colony Variant of Pseudomonas aeruginosa

ORGANISM
Pseudomonas aeruginosa

SUMMARY
Background  Small colony variants (SCVs) are slow-growing bacteria, which often show increased  resistance to antibiotics and cause latent or recurrent infections. It is therefore  important to understand the mechanisms at the basis of this phenotypic switch.  Methodology/Principal findings  One SCV (termed PAO-SCV) was isolated, showing high resistance to gentamicin and  to the cephalosporine cefotaxime. PAO-SCV was prone to reversion as evidenced by  emergence of large colonies with a frequency of 10-5 on media without antibiotics  while it was stably maintained in presence of gentamicin. PAO-SCV showed a delayed  growth, defective motility, and strongly reduced levels of the quorum sensing  Pseudomonas quinolone signal (PQS). Whole genome expression analysis further  suggested a multi-layered antibiotic resistance mechanism, including simultaneous  over-expression of two drug efflux pumps (MexAB-OprM, MexXY-OprM), the LPS  modification operon arnBCADTEF, and the PhoP-PhoQ two-component system.  Conversely, the genes for the synthesis of PQS were strongly down-regulated in PAOSCV.  Finally, genomic analysis revealed the presence of mutations in phoP and phoQ  genes as well as in the mexZ gene encoding a repressor of the mexXY and mexABoprM  genes. Only one mutation occurred only in REV, at nucleotide 1020 of the tufA  gene, a paralog of tufB, both encoding the elongation factor Tu, causing a change of  the rarely used aspartic acid codon GAU to the more common GAC, possibly causing  an increase of tufA mRNA translation. High expression of phoP and phoQ was  confirmed for the SCV variant while the revertant showed expression levels reduced to  wild-type levels.  Conclusions  By combining data coming from phenotypic, gene expression and proteome analysis,  we could demonstrate that resistance to aminoglycosides in one SCV mutant is  multifactorial including overexpression of efflux mechanisms, LPS modification and is  accompanied by a drastic down-regulation of the Pseudomonas quinolone signal  quorum sensing system. We used microarrays to study changes in gene expression during early and late stationary phase of SCV and WT strains.

DESIGN
SCV and WT cultures were grown in triplicate until early (24h) and late (48h) stationary phase.  RNA was extracted, labelled and hybridised on Affymetrix P. aeruginosa expression microarrays.

