TITLE
MicroRNA implication in murine liver regeneration

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Liver is uniquely capable to repair itself after injury. Multiple molecular and biochemical processes initiated after partial hepatectomy, lead to proliferation of all cells within the liver. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of highly abundant non-coding RNA molecules that cause post-transcriptional gene repression and are involved in several biological processes including cell cycle regulation and differentiation. We examined the expression levels of miRNAs in liver tissue received from control mice (L0) and compared them with the corresponding levels in liver tissue 12 hours after liver regeneration induced by 2/3 partial hepatectomy (L12). MicroRNA expression was investigated using microRNA profiling. Further qPCR analysis was used for validation of the differentially expressed microRNAs at an early stage of liver regeneration, induced by 2/3 partial hepatectomy. TargetScan and Gene Ontology (GO) analysis was performed in order to identify the possible miRNA target genes and their ontology, respectively. A subset of miRNAs were found to be differentially expressed during liver regeneration. Mmu-miR-21 and mmu-miR-30b* showed the higher levels of up-regulation in liver tissue from the hepatectomized mice at the end of the experiment (L12) compared to the sham operated mice (L0). Mmu-miR-21 up-regulation was further confirmed by qPCR. In situ hybridization (ISH) revealed that mmu-miR-21 exhibited the higher levels of expression at 12 hours post hepatectomy. On the contrary, mmu-miR-34c*, mmu-miR-144, mmu-miR-207, mmu-miR-207, mmu-miR-451, mmu-miR-582-3p and mmu-miR-290-5p exhibited < 0.5 down-regulation in liver tissue after partial hepatectomy in L12 vs. L0 mice. Microarrays and qPCR results were in good agreement (Pearson correlation = 0.881). Our results provide important information regarding how microRNAs are deferentially expressed in murine liver tissue before and after partial hepatectomy. The early up-regulation of mmu-miR-21 during the process of liver regeneration suggests a regulatory role in liver regeneration in vivo.

