TITLE
Global gene expression profiling in PPAR-γ agonist-treated kidneys in an orthologous rat model of human autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Kidneys are enlarged by aberrant proliferation of tubule epithelial cells leading to the formation of numerous cysts, nephron loss, and interstitial fibrosis in polycystic kidney disease (PKD). Pioglitazone (PIO), a PPAR-γ agonist, decreased cell proliferation, interstitial fibrosis and inflammation, and ameliorated PKD progression in PCK rats.  To examine the genetic mechanisms in this efficacy, we analyzed changes in global gene expression.  By Gene Set Enrichment Analysis of 30655 genes, 13 of the top 20 down-regulated gene ontology biological process gene sets, and six of the top 20 curated gene set canonical pathways identified to be down-regulated by PIO-treatment were related to cell cycle and proliferation, including EGF, PDGF and JNK pathways.  Their relevant pathways were identified using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Gene and Genomes database.  Stearoyl-Coenzyme A desaturase 1 is a key enzyme in fatty acid metabolism found in the top 5 genes down-regulated by PIO treatment. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the gene product of this enzyme was highly expressed in PCK kidneys, and decreased by PIO.  These data show that PIO alters the expression of genes involved in cell cycle progression, cell proliferation, and fatty acid metabolism.

DESIGN
RNA was extracted from kidneys of rats with or without PIO treatment using a monophasic solution of phenol/guanidine isothiocyanate and TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen Co., Carlsbad, CA, USA) in accordance with their manual, and the samples were incubated with RNase-free DNase I (Ambion, TX, USA).  The quality and concentration of each sample was confirmed by spectrophotometry (NanoDropTM ND-1000; Asahi glass Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan).  Total RNA obtained from five females were pooled in each PIO-treated or control vehicle-treated (CONT) group. Briefly, 500 ng aliquots of total RNA obtained from kidneys of three rats were labeled using an Quick Amp Labeling Kit, one-color (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  The pooled renal RNA of PIO- or vehicle-treated rats were labeled with the Cy3-fluorescence dye.  After determination of labeling efficiency, 1.65 μg aliquots of Cy3-labeled RNA were hybridized using the Gene Expression hybridization kit (Agilent Technologies) onto Rat Oligo Microarrays (Agilent Technologies, product no. G4130A) according to the manufacturer’s hybridization protocol.  The microarray slides were examined with an Agilent microarray scanner and software.  Data analysis was performed with Agilent Feature Extraction software (version 10.7.3.1).

