TITLE
Differential expression of Wnt signalling molecules between pre- and post-menopausal endometrial epithelial cells suggests that a population of putative epithelial stem/progenitor cells reside in the basalis layer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The human endometrium is a highly regenerative tissue that undergoes cyclical proliferation, differentiation and shedding each month. The upper functionalis layer of the endometrium is shed in response to circulating levels of estrogen and progesterone, while the lower basalis layer remains. Clonogenic epithelial stem/progenitor cells likely responsible for regenerating endometrial epithelium have been identified in pre-menopausal (Pre-M) and post-menopausal (Post-M) endometrium and may reside in the basalis layer. We undertook a transcriptional profiling of purified epithelial cells from full-thickness Pre-M and Post-M endometrium to identify differentially expressed genes. The hypothesis tested in the present study was that Post-M endometrial epithelial gene profile would be similar to the quiescent basalis epithelium of Pre-M endometrium. We found striking differential gene expression of many Wnt family members between Pre-M and Post-M and other stem cell network genes. Comparative analysis of our endometrial epithelial gene expression profiles to that of endometrial epithelial cells in remodelling endometrium also provides new evidence showing that Post-M endometrial epithelium has a similar gene signature to that of basalis epithelium of menstrual endometrium.

DESIGN
Human endometrial tissue was obtained from 8 pre-menopausal and 3 post-menopausal women undergoing hysterectomy for various benign gynaecologic conditions. Endometrial tissue was digested and isolated using combination of DNase and collagenase. Anti-human EpCAM antibody-coated magnetic Dynabeads was used to positively select total epithelial cells from the digested single cell suspensions. Total RNA was extracted from the purified endometrial epithelial cells and hybridised to Illumina Sentrix HT12 beadchip. Resulting data was compared between pre-menopausal and post-menopausal samples.

