TITLE
Prenatal smoke exposure, DNA methylation, and childhood atopic disorders

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Background: How prenatal smoke exposure affects DNA methylation leading to atopic disorders remains to be addressed. Epigenetic biomarkers informative of prenatal smoke exposure and atopic disorders are wanting. Since most children suffering from atopic dermatitis (AD) continue to develop asthma later in life, we explored whether prenatal smoke exposure e induces DNA methylation and searched for predictive epigenetic biomarkers for smoke related atopic disorders.   Methods: Methylation differences associated with smoke exposure were screened by Illumina methylation panel for children from the Taiwan birth panel study cohort initially. Information about development of atopic dermatitis (AD) and risk factors were collected. Cord blood cotinine levels were measured to represent prenatal smoke exposure. CpG loci that demonstrated a statistically significant difference in methylation were validated by methylation-dependent fragment separation (MDFS). Differential methylation in three genes (TSLP, GSTT1, and CYB5R3) was identified through the screen and their functions were investigated. Results: Among these, only thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) gene displayed significant difference in promoter methylation percentage after being validated by MDFS (p=0.029). TSLP gene was further investigated in a larger sample of 92 children from the cohort. Methylation status of the TSLP 5′-CpG island (CGI) was found to be significantly associated with prenatal smoke exposure (OR=3.59, 95%CI=1.49-8.64; cotinine level 0.10 ng/ml, sensitivity= 77%; specificity = 61%) and with AD (OR=4.77, 95%CI=1.47-15.53). The degree of TSLP 5′CGI methylation inversely correlated with TSLP protein expression levels (per unit: β=－6.69 ng/ml; 95% CIs, －12.80~－0.59; p=0.032).   Conclusions: The effect of prenatal tobacco smoke exposure on the risk for AD may be mediated through DNA methylation. Cord blood methylated TSLP 5′CGI may be a potential epigenetic biomarker for environmentally-related atopic disorders.

DESIGN
The buffy coat and plasma samples were separated and stored at −80°C. DNA (100 ng-500 ng) was extracted from cord white blood cells. Microarrays have been performed to investigate fourteen samples, which were classified as two groups according to cotinine exposure dosage (7 versus 7 : high exposure verses low exposure).

