TITLE
Expression of paraventricular hypothalamus (PVN) from electroconvulsive seizure (ECS) treated C57Bl/6 mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Rationale Electroconvulsive seizure (ECS) therapy is a nonchemical treatment for depression. Since ECS up-regulates expression of c-Fos in the paraventricular nucleus of hypothalamus (PVN), the function of which is frequently influenced in depression, we hypothesized that ECS modulates functions of the PVN and contributes to its antidepressant effects.   Objectives To identify gene expression changes in the mouse PVN by ECS treatment  Material and methods First, we established a method to amplify nucleotides from small quantities of RNA. Mice received one shock of ECS and their brains were collected at 2 or 6 h after shock. The PVN was microdissected from dehydrated brain sections, its total RNA was extracted and microarray analysis was applied.   Results At 2 h after ECS, 2.6% (589 genes) of the probes showed more than 2-fold decrease, and 0.9% (205 genes) showed more than 2-fold increase. To confirm the expression changes, genes showing differential expression with a wide range in the microarray were analyzed by qPCR. Among the genes with more than 2-fold change by ECS, down-regulated 94 genes and up-regulated 24 genes have been reported the association with anxiety, bipolar disorder or mood disorder by the Ingenuity knowledge database. The groups of down-regulated genes, which are suggested to modulate the function of the PVN or associate to psychiatric disorders, include neuropeptides (Cck), kinases (Prkcb, Prkcc, Camk2a), transcription factors (Bcl6, Tbr1), transporters (Aqp4) and others (Fmr1).   Conclusion The present results indicate that ECS treatment can modulate the functions of PVN via a series of gene expression changes, and may contribute to its antidepressant effects at least in part.

DESIGN
Mice received one shock of ECS and their brains were collected at 2 h (PVN_ECS2h_1, PVN_ECS2h_2) or 6 h after shock (PVN_ECS6h_1, PVN_ECS6h_2). The brains of sham-treated animals were collected at 2 h after treatment (PVN_sham_1, PVN_sham_2). The PVN was microdissected from dehydrated brain sections, and its total RNA was extracted. RNA samples from two or three animals were pooled to minimize the impact of biological variance. After nucleotide amplification by the ovation amplification, the gene expression profiles were obtained by the Affymetrix microarray analysis. The microarray analysis was performed twice using different sets of animals.

