TITLE
Genomic analysis of marginal zone and lymphoplasmacytic lymphomas identified common and disease-specific abnormalities

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Lymphoplasmacytic lymphomas and marginal zone lymphomas of nodal, extra-nodal and splenic types account for 10% of non-Hodgkin lymphomas.  They are similar at the cell differentiation level, sometimes making difficult to distinguish them from other indolent non-Hodgkin lymphomas.  To better characterize their genetic basis, we performed array-based comparative genomic hybridization in 101 marginal zone lymphomas (46 MALT, 35 splenic and 20 nodal marginal zone lymphomas) and 13 lymphoplasmacytic lymphomas.  Overall, 90.1% exhibited copy-number abnormalities.  Lymphoplasmacytic lymphomas demonstrated the most complex karyotype (median=7 copy-number abnormalities), followed by MALT (4), nodal (3.5) and splenic marginal zone lymphomas (3).  A comparative analysis exposed a group of copy-number abnormalities shared by several or all the entities with few disease-specific abnormalities.  Gain of chromosomes 3, 12 and 18 and loss of 6q23-q24 (TNFAIP3) were identified in all entities.  Losses of 13q14.3 (MIRN15A-MIRN16-1) and 17p13.3-p12 (TP53) were found in lymphoplasmacytic and splenic marginal zone lymphomas; loss of 11q21-q22 (ATM) in nodal, splenic marginal zone and lymphoplasmacytic lymphomas; loss of 7q32.1-q33 in MALT, splenic and lymphoplasmacytic lymphomas.  Abnormalities affecting the NF-kB pathway were observed in 70% of MALT and lymphoplasmacytic lymphomas and 30% of splenic and nodal marginal zone lymphomas, suggesting distinct roles of this pathway in the pathogenesis/progression of these subtypes.  Elucidation of the genetic alterations contributing to the pathogenesis of these lymphomas may guide to design specific therapeutic approaches.

DESIGN
One hundred fourteen patients were included in this study: 46 MALT lymphomas (22 pulmonary, 11 salivary glands, 7 lacrimal glands and 6 gastrointestinal), 35 splenic marginal zone lymphomas, 20 nodal marginal zone lymphomas and 13 non-Waldenström’s Macroglobulinemia lymphoplasmacytic lymphomas.  All cases were reviewed prior to study on paraffin sections with immunohistochemistry.  Sections of each frozen tissue used for study were also reviewed by histological examination and immunohistochemistry before was submitted for the study.

