TITLE
Systems and trans-system level analysis identifies conserved Fe-deficiency responses in the plant lineage

ORGANISM
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

SUMMARY
We used RNA-Seq to compare the transcriptomes of Fe-replete vs. Fe-deficient vs. Fe-limited Chlamydomonas wild-type cells.  Our RNA-Seq data revealed 90 and 49 genes to be specifically expressed under hetero-phototrophic and phototrophic conditions, respectively. Around 30 genes represent putative Fe-deficiency targets, independent of the carbon source used. Many of these Fe-specific responses are conserved between Chlamydomonas and land plants. We identified several transporters (NRAMP4, a CCC1-like proteins and a ferroportin homologue) all of them most likely being involved in intracellular Fe redistribution. RNA-seq of Chlamydomonas Fe-deficient and limited cells indicated that about 40% of differentially expressed genes represent proteins of unknown functions. Whereas Fe-deficiency gave us insides into putative Fe-specific responses, Fe-limitation revealed responses related to increased oxidative stress. Quantitative proteomics on the soluble Chlamydomonas extracts indicated a fair correlation between changes we detected at mRNA levels compared to changes in protein levels in Fe-deficient and Fe-limited Chlamydomonas. We found that Fe-deficient and Fe-limited cells have increased ascorbate levels, a major antioxidant molecule in plants. Ascorbate levels appear to be elevated by de novo synthesis via the L-Galactose pathway and recycling by monodehydroascorbate reductase. Fe-limited cells showed increased transcript and protein levels of enzymatic antioxidant components of the ascorbate-glutathione scavenging system (MSD3, MDAR1 or GSH1). Fe-limited cells showed the increase of several proteases indicative of elevated proteolitic activity under these severe nutrient limitation conditions.

DESIGN
Sampling of Chlamydomonas CC-1021 (2137) cells cultivated photoheterotrophically (TAP) or phototrophically (minimal)  under Fe-replete (20mM), Fe-deficient (1 mM) and Fe-limited (0.25 mM) conditions.

