TITLE
Differential regional gene expression from cardiac dyssynchrony

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Right ventricular free wall (RVFW) pacing results in left ventricular dyssynchrony with early septal shortening followed by late lateral contraction that reciprocally stretches the septum.  Dyssynchrony is disadvantageous to cardiac mechano-energetics, yet little is known about its molecular consequences.  We tested the hypothesis that dyssynchrony selectively alters regional gene expression in mice, employing a novel miniature implantable cardiac pacemaker.  Mice were subjected to 1-week overdrive RVFW pacing (720 min-1, baseline HR 520-620 min-1) to induce dyssynchrony  (pacemaker: 3V lithium battery, rate programmable, 0.8 grams, bipolar lead).  Electrical capture was confirmed by pulsed-wave Doppler at implantation and terminal study, and dyssynchrony by echocardiography.  Gene expression from left ventricular septal and lateral-wall myocardium were assessed by microarray (dual-dye method, Agilent) using oligonucleotide probes and dye swap.  Identical analysis was applied to 4 synchronously contracting controls.  Of 22,000 genes surveyed, only 18 genes displayed significant (p < 0.01) differential expression between septal/lateral walls  exceeding 1.5-fold relative to any disparities in synchronous controls.  These changes were confirmed by qPCR with excellent correlations. Most (16) of the genes showed greater septal expression.  Of particular interest were 7 genes coding proteins involved with stretch responses, matrix remodeling, stem cell differentiation to myocyte lineage, and Purkinje fiber differentiation.  One-week cardiac dyssynchrony triggers regional differential expression differences in relatively few select genes.  Such analysis using a murine implantable pacemaker should facilitate molecular studies of cardiac dyssynchrony and help elucidate novel mechanisms by which stress/stretch stimuli due to dyssynchrony impact the normal and failing heart. Keywords: Murine cardiac dyssynchrony and differential gene expression, Agilent, microarray, pacing

