TITLE
Testing the limits of 454 pyrotag sequencing: reproducibility, quantitative assessment and comparison to T-RFLP fingerprinting of aquifer microbes

ORGANISM
Aliivibrio fischeri

SUMMARY
The characterization of microbial community structure via 16S rRNA gene profiling has been greatly advanced in recent years by the application of amplicon pyrosequencing. The possibility of barcode-tagged sequencing of templates gives the opportunity to massively screen multiple samples from environmental or clinical sources for community details. However, an on-going debate questions the reproducibility and semi-quantitative rigour of pyrotag sequencing and, as in the early days of genetic community fingerprinting, pros and cons are continuously provided. In this study we investigate the reproducibility of bacterial 454 pyrotag sequencing over biological and technical replicates of natural microbiota. Moreover, via quantitatively defined template spiking to the natural community, we explore the potential for recovering specific template ratios within complex microbial communities. For this reason, we pyrotag sequenced three biological replicates of three samples, each belonging from yearly sampling campaigns of sediment from a tar oil contaminated aquifer in Düsseldorf, Germany. Furthermore, we subjected one DNA extract to replicate technical analyses as well as to increasing ratios (0, 0.2, 2 and 20%) of 16S rRNA genes from a pure culture (Aliivibrio fisheri) originally not present in the sample. Unexpectedly, taxa abundances were highly reproducible in our hands, with max standard deviation of ~3% abundance across biological and ~2% for technical replicates. Furthermore, our workflow was also capable of recovering A. fisheri amendmend ratios in reliable amounts (0, 0.29, 3.9 and 23.8%). These results highlight that pyrotag sequencing, if done and evaluated with due caution, has the potential to robustly recapture taxa template abundances within environmental microbial communities.

