TITLE
Exogenous Interleukin-10 versus Glucocorticoids: Effect on Gene Expression and Pro-inflammatory Cytokine Release in Polymorphonuclear Leukocytes and Monocytes of the Newborn

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
INTRODUCTION: Persistent lung inflammation, with an influx of polymorphonuclear leukocytes and monocytes, occurs early in bronchopulmonary dysplasia. We hypothesized that: 1) that interleukin-10, a potent anti-inflammatory cytokine, would cause a markedly different gene expression profile compared to dexamethasone in these cells, and 2) monocyte insensitivity to dexamethasone was related to glucocorticoid receptor expression. RESULTS: For polymorphonuclear leukocytes, there were < 20% of genes changing expression in common between interleukin-10 and dexamethasone. The monocyte had 5 times the number of genes changing expression with interleukin-10 compared to the polymorphonuclear leukocyte. Dexamethasone, in the therapeutic range, had no effect on  gene expression in monocytes. The order of potency for inhibition of interleukin-8 release from monocytes was IL-10 > betamethasone > > dexamethasone and hydrocortisone. Glucocorticoid potency was directly related to the degree of glucocorticoid receptor translocation to the monocyte nucleus. DISCUSSION: Gene expression profiles by IL-10 versus dexamethasone indicates that there may be major differences in efficacy and adverse effects if interleukin-10 is used for therapy in the future. Betamethasone may be a better therapeutic choice than dexamethasone. METHODS: Isolated cord blood cells were pre-incubated with anti-inflammatory agents prior to endotoxin stimulation. Measurements were made by microarrays, RT-qPCR, ELISA, and Western blots.

DESIGN
Isolation of cord blood polymorphonuclear leukocytes and monocytes separately from 5 subjects. Endotoxin stimulation in cell culture for 4 hours. Comparison of gene expression between endotoxin alone versus endotoxin-stimualted cells pretreated with interleukin-10 or dexamethasone (at equimolar, therapeutic levels, 10-8 M. Cell Types : MONOs, PMNs; Treatments: LPS, LPS+IL-10, LPS+DEX

