TITLE
Leukotriene D4- and Thrombin-Triggered Transcriptomes in Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Cysteinyl leukotrienes (cysLT), i.e. LTC4, LTD4, and LTE4, are lipid mediators derived from the 5-lipoxygenase pathway. The cysLT receptors cysLT1-R and cysLT2-R are expressed on different target cells and mediate inflammatory reactions in tissue- and LT-R-specific ways. Though endothelial cells (ECs) predominantly express cysLT2-Rs, their role in vascular biology remains to be defined. To delineate cysLT2-R´s action, we stimulated human umbilical vein EC with 100 nM LTD4 for 60 min, determined gene signatures by microarrays, and characterized the resulting EC phenotypes. As controls, we compared LTD4-induced genes with those induced by 10 nM thrombin, a prototype vasoactive activator of EC that binds to protease-activated receptor 1 (PAR-1). Following application of stringent filters 37 LTD4-upregulated genes were identified ( > 2.5fold stimulation). Surprisingly, most of the LTD4-regulated genes were also induced by thrombin and expression of cysLT2-R- and PAR-1-regulated genes strongly correlated (Pearson correlation coefficient: r = 0.90). Moreover, LTD4 + thrombin, when added together, augmented expression of LTD4- or thrombin-stimulated genes (Wilcoxon signed rank test: p < 0.01). Prominently induced genes that may play roles in vascular injury were studied in detail: Early growth response (EGR) and nuclear receptor subfamily 4 group A; E-selectin; CXC ligand 2; interleukin 8 (IL-8); a disintegrin-like and metalloprotease (reprolysin type) with thrombospondin type 1 motif 1 (ADAMTS-1); and tissue factor (TF). Transcripts of these genes peaked at approximately 60 min, were unaffected by the cysLT1-R antagonist montelukast, and were superinduced by cycloheximide. The EC phenotype was markedly altered: LTD4 induced de novo synthesis of EGR1 protein and EGR1 localized in the nucleus in LTD4-stimulated cells; LTD4 upregulated IL-8 formation and secretion; and LTD4 raised TF protein and TF-dependent EC pro-coagulant activity. These data show that cysLT2-R activation results in a pro-inflammatory EC phenotype through activation of immediate-early genes that resemble those induced by PAR-1. As LTD4 and thrombin are formed concomitantly during vascular injury and pro-thrombotic states, cysLT2-R and PAR-1 may collaborate in vivo to mediate vascular injury and repair. Keywords: Leukotriene Transcriptome, Thrombin Transcriptome, HUVEC, Immediate-Early Gene Expression, Cysteinyl Leukotriene 2 Receptor Gene Signature in HUVEC

