TITLE
Gene expression profiles in white blood cells in response to exercise

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
White blood cells (WBCs) express tens of thousands of genes. Their expression levels are modified by genetic and external factors. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the effects of acute exercise on gene expression profiles (GEPs) of WBCs and to identify suitable genes which may serve as surrogate markers for monitoring exercise and training load. Five male probands performed an exhaustive treadmill test (ET) at 80% of their VO2max, and a moderate treadmill test (MT) at 60% VO2max for exactly the same time one to two week later. White blood cells (WBCs) were isolated by the erythrocyte lysis method. Gene expression profiles were measured using the Affymetrix GeneChip® technology. After scaling, normalisation, and filtering groupwise and pairwise comparisons of gene expression intensities were performed and validated by real-time PCR. We found 450 genes up-regulated and 150 down-regulated ( > 1.5-fold change; ANOVA with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing, p < 0.05) upon exhaustive exercise. Analysis of mean expression levels after MT showed that the extent of up- and down-regulation was workload dependent. The genes for the stress proteins HSPA1A, HSPH1 and the matrix metalloproteinase MMP-9 showed the most prominent increases whereas the mRNA concentrations of the YES1 oncogene (YES1), of CD160 (BY55), and of a member of the mitochondrial electron transport chain (ATP5s) were most strongly reduced. Remarkably, we could largely reproduce the data from a previous report by Connolly et al. (01) even though we used considerably different methodology. After acute exercise the genes with increased expression levels were highly significantly associated with the gene ontology terms heat-shock proteins, apoptosis and inflammation. The results demonstrate that gene expression changes in WBCs can reflect intensity and duration of exercise. Further analysis is needed to confirm the applicability of expression fingerprints as useful tools for monitoring exercise and training loads in order to avoid training associated health risks. Keywords: response to different loads of acute exercise

