TITLE
Mapping the Transcriptional Landscape of Autoimmune Targeted Tissues: Transient Alterations in the Extracellular Milieu Precede Innate and Delayed Adaptive Immune Responses in Spontaneous Experimental Autoimmunity.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mouse is a model for primary Sjögren’s syndrome and was constructed by introducing two genetic intervals derived from the NOD mouse that confers Sjögren’s syndrome (SjS)-like disease in SjS-non-susceptible C57BL/6 mice. To define the chronological interrelationships of biological themes associated with progression from pre- to sub-clinical to overt spontaneous experimental SjS-like disease involving the extracellular milieu (EM) of the salivary glands, we carried out a study utilizing microarray technology in which the parental C57BL/6J mouse was used as the healthy control strain. A bioinformatics-based data analysis methodology designed for comprehensive visualization of global datasets between C57BL/6J and C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mice has permitted a definition of the molecular changes that correlate with onset of stomatitis sicca (xerostomia) in the SjS-susceptible mice.  The transcriptome data set of C57BL/6J permitted identification of normal physiological activity.

DESIGN
The study was designed to define the changing gene expression profiles within the salivary glands of C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mice at multiple time points representing a pre-disease stage (4 weeks), the early pre-clinical stage (8 weeks), the initial influx of leukocytes into the salivary glands (12 weeks), and the early clinical phase of autoimmunity (16 weeks) to characterize the influence of the extracellular milieu on early development of disease.  Because the C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mouse was derived from the C57BL/6J line, C57BL/6J mice were used as the comparative healthy controls.  This comparison permitted the identification of disease-associated gene expressions by subtracting out normal physiological processes. This present study represents the C57BL/6J healthy control mice. Series GSE15640 includes the data for the C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mice.

