TITLE
Variation in the transcriptional response of threatened coral larvae to elevated temperatures

ORGANISM
Acropora palmata

SUMMARY
Coral populations have declined worldwide largely due to increased sea surface temperatures. Recovery of coral populations depends in part upon larval recruitment. Many corals reproduce during the warmest time of year when further increases in temperature can lead to low fertilization rates of eggs and high larval mortality. Microarray experiments were designed to capture and assess variability in the thermal stress responses of Acropora palmata larvae from Puerto Rico. Transcription profiles showed a striking acceleration of normal developmental gene expression patterns with increased temperature. The transcriptional response to heat suggested rapid depletion of larval energy stores via peroxisomal lipid oxidation and included key enzymes that indicated the activation of the glyoxylate cycle. High temperature also resulted in expression differences in key developmental signalling genes including the conserved WNT pathway that is critical for pattern formation and tissue differentiation in developing embryos. Expression of these and other important developmental and thermal stress genes such as ferritin, heat shock proteins, cytoskeletal components, cell adhesion and autophagy proteins also varied among larvae derived from different parent colonies. Disruption of normal developmental and metabolic processes will have negative impacts on larval survival and dispersal as temperatures rise. However, it appears that variation in larval response to high temperature remains despite the dramatic population declines. Further research is needed to determine whether this variation is heritable or attributable to maternal effects.

DESIGN
Hybridization followed a dual channel loop design using two biological replicates (dye-swapped) from each treatment that maximized power to detect differential expression in contrasts between temperatures and batches (within time-points) as well as the amount of data obtained from each slide (Simon and Dobbin 2003). A total of 18 arrays on two 12 plex slides were used (Table S1). Additional samples from other sub-batches (b3/b4) were included in the microarray experiment but are not used in this analysis. Each array measures the expression level of 135,185 genes from the elkhorn coral (Acropora palmata) transcriptome (Polato et al. 2011). Two 60-mer probes were designed for each contig (n = 85,260), and a single probe was designed for each singleton sequence (n = 45,390). Two additional probes each were developed for sequences associated with annotation information relating to calcium metabolism and stress response (n = 4,798). Replicate probes for individual sequences from the assembled transcriptome were not identical; rather they represented multiple different 60-mer sequences from the original template.

