TITLE
Subtype-specific response to bevacizumab is reflected in the metabolome and transcriptome of breast cancer xenografts

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The VEGF targeted antiangiogenic drug bevacizumab has shown varying results in clinical trials of breast cancer. Identifying robust biomarkers for selecting patients that may benefit from bevacizumab treatment and for monitoring of response is important for the future use of this drug. Two established xenograft models representing basal-like and luminal-like breast cancer were used to study bevacizumab treatment response on the metabolic and gene expression levels. Mice given no treatment or treated with bevacizumab, doxorubicin or the combination of these two drugs were sacrificed at day 3 or 10. High resolution magic angle spinning magnetic resonance spectroscopy (HR MAS MRS) and gene expression microarray analysis was performed on all tumor samples. Combination treatment with bevacizumab had the strongest growth inhibiting effect in the basal-like tumors, and this was reflected in a significant response in the metabolomic and transcriptomic profiles. In the luminal-like xenografts, addition of bevacizumab did not improve the effect of doxorubicin. On the global transcriptomic level, the largest changes in gene expression were observed for the most efficient treatment in each of the two xenograft models. The metabolite glycerophosphocholine (GPC) showed opposite response in the treated xenografts compared with untreated controls: lower in basal-like tumors and higher in luminal-like tumors. Lower levels of creatine, taurine and glycine were observed in the basal-like xenografts given bevacizumab as monotherapy compared with untreated xenografts. Comparing combination therapy with doxorubicin monotherapy in basal-like xenografts, 14 genes showed significant differential expression, including higher expression of very low density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR), and lower expression of hemoglobin, theta 1 (HBQ1). Using published gene expression signatures, bevacizumab treated tumors were associated with a more hypoxic phenotype, while no evidence was found for associations between bevacizumab treatment and vascular invasion or increasing tumor grade. This study underlines the importance of characterizing biological differences between subtypes of breast cancer to identify personalized biomarkers for selecting patients for bevacizumab treatment and evaluating response to therapy.

DESIGN
60 samples are analyzed. For each of the two xenograft models, tumors were collected from animals that were untreated or treated with bevacizumab (5 mg/kg), doxorubicin (8 mg/kg) or a combination of the two therapies (n = 6 tumors for each group). Bevacizumab treatment was repeated at day 4 and day 7. Animals were sacrificed and tissue harvested at either day 3 or 10 after treatment, in triplicates within each treatment group. This resulted in 24 tumor samples from each of the models. In addition, untreated and bevacizumab treated luminal-like xenografts not fed with estradiol were included for comparison (n = 12).  Note that the untreated controls are overlapping with the samples in the GEO series with accession number: GSE25915.

