TITLE
Comparative Analysis of Seed Transcriptomes of Ambient Ozone-Fumigated Two Different Rice Cultivars

ORGANISM
Oryza sativa

SUMMARY
High ozone (O3) concentration causes serious damages in plant productivity.  Climate models forecast that ground O3 level in the future will reach phytotoxic range, resulting in crop yield losses.  With an ultimate goal to screen molecular factors to minimize losses of crop production by the rise of O3 level, we have started an investigation on effects of O3 on rice using rice DNA chip.  Herein, we have utilized the samples of dry mature rice seeds harvested in an ozone-sensitive rice cultivar (Oryza sativa L. indica cv. Takanari) and a tolerant cultivar (Oryza sativa L. japonica cv. Koshihikari) which were fumigated with ambient air (mean O3: 32.7 ppb) in small open-top chambers (OTCs).  First, we extracted total RNA from dry mature rice seeds of Takanari and Koshihikari using a modified protocol based on cethyltrimethylammonium bromide extraction buffer and phenol-chloroform-isoamylalcohol treatment.  Furthermore, to perform microarray analysis using the Agilent 4x44 rice DNA Chip and the dye-swap method, we designed a balanced block design comparing seeds in an ambient air-fumigated rice cultivar and those in a filtered air-fumigated rice cultivar.  Direct comparison of Koshihikari and Takanari O3 transcriptomes in seeds of rice plants fumigated with ambient O3 in OTCs successfully showed that genes encoding proteins involved in jasmonic acid, GABA biosynthesis, cell wall and membrane modification, starch mobilization, and secondary metabolite biosynthesis are differently regulated in an O3-sensitive cv. Takanari and a tolerant cv. Koshihikari.

DESIGN
Comparison between O. sativa L. indica cv. Takanari and japonica cv. Koshihikari grown under ozone for their lifetime was performed. Controls were plants grown under filtered air. Three biological replicates (4 plants in each biologicla rpelicate in each small open top chamber - seed; pooled) were used, and dye-swaped.

