TITLE
Comprehensive gene expression analysis of cerebral cortices from mature rats after neonatal hypoxic-ischemic brain injury

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
Neonatal hypoxic-ischemic (HI) encephalopathy can lead to severe brain damage and is a common cause of neurological handicaps in adulthood. To elucidate the molecular events occurring in cerebral cortices of mature rats (8 weeks old) after neonatal HI brain insult, we performed comprehensive gene expression and gene network analyses using a DNA microarray system (Agilent 4x44K). A rat model of neonatal HI encephalopathy (Rice model) was obtained by unilateral ligation of the common carotid artery of 7-day-old rats with hypoxia (exposure to 8% oxygen). Due to the HI insult-related breakdown of the ipsilateral hemisphere in the brain, RNAs were prepared from the contralateral cerebral cortices of 8-week-old rats and analyzed by DNA microarray. Biofunctional analysis of differentially regulated genes revealed that many upregulated genes were related to cell death signaling, such as the arachidonic acid cascade. In contrast, many downregulated genes were related to gene expression, reflecting progressive damage by the HI insult, even within the contralateral cerebral hemisphere.

DESIGN
Seven-day-old Wistar rats were assigned to two groups: the control group and the Rice group (four pups in each group). HI brain insult was not induced in the control group rats. The Rice group rats were subjected to a modified Levine’s procedure to induce HI brain injury. The Rice group rats were anesthetized with ether, and the left carotid artery was sectioned between double ligatures with 4-0 surgical silk. The rats were allowed to recover for 1–2 h and then exposed to 1 h of hypoxia in a plastic chamber that was perfused with a mixture of humidified 8% oxygen balanced with nitrogen. The temperature inside the chamber was maintained at 33 °C, the usual temperature generated when pups huddle with the mother.  The cerebral cortexes contralateral to the HI brain insult and those of the same side of the control animals were used for the experiment.

