TITLE
Adrenal gene expression profiles of male and female Kcnk3 null mice in basal conditions or after hormonal treatment.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Primary aldosteronism (PA) is a common form of endocrine hypertension suspected in the presence of arterial hypertension (HT), hypokalemia and low plasma renin levels. While for a long time the genetic causes of PA have remained mysterious, recent findings have revealed an important role for an altered function of potassium channels in the pathogenesis of this disease. The basis for the unique sensitivity of adrenal zona glomerulosa (ZG) cells for plasma potassium concentration is a very high background potassium conductance, which is dependent on expression at high levels of two 2-pore domain (K2P) potassium channels, Task1 (KCNK3) and Task3 (KCNK9. Recent studies have shown that mice lacking Kcnk3 (Task1) or both Kcnk3 and Kcnk9 have PA. In Kcnk3 null mice, hyperaldosteronism is present in young animals of either sex, but is corrected in males after puberty. Strikingly, in these animals hyperaldosteronism associates with abnormal adrenal cortex functional zonation, since Cyp11b2, the rate-limiting enzyme for aldosterone production, is expressed in the inner region of the adrenal cortex and not in the glomerulosa. Additionally, this phenotype is under the control of sex hormones, as shown by the fact that castration of male Kcnk3 -/- animals prevents normal Cyp11b2 distribution, while testosterone injection in female Kcnk3 null mice restores expression of Cyp11b2 in ZG cells. We took advantage of the unique characteristics of the Kcnk3 null mouse model to search for genes that can modify their phenotype of PA and adrenocortical functional zonation. Using gene expression profiling in the adrenal glands of Kcnk3 null mice and exploiting the possibility of modulation of their phenotype by sexual hormones, we identified a cluster of genes closely associated with hyperaldosteronism in a sex- and hormone-dependent dynamic fashion. Among these genes, we focused our attention on Dkk3 (dickkopf3), encoding a peculiar member of the dickkopf family of Wnt signalling modulators because of its close association with aldosterone-producing cells in humans (11). Inactivation of Dkk3 in the Kcnk3 null background causes extension of the hyperaldosteronemic phenotype and increased expression of Cyp11b2 in the adrenal gland to the male sex, without affecting functional zonation. These data indicate that Dkk3 is a component of the genetic circuitry regulating expression of Cyp11b2 and suggest that it may be implicated in the pathogenesis of low-renin hyperaldosteronism in humans.

DESIGN
One color -experiment with 2 strains of mice: C57BL/6 WT or Kcnk3 null (KO): male and female in basal conditions or following hormonal treatment (castration for males and testosterone injection for females), corresponding to 8 groups of animals. Total of 24 samples (n=3).

