TITLE
Transcriptional profiling of experimental CD8+ lymphocyte depletion in rhesus macaques infected with SIVmac239

ORGANISM
Macaca mulatta

SUMMARY
CD8+ T-cells inhibit virus replication in SIV-infected rhesus macaques (RM). However, it is unclear to what extent the viral suppression mediated by CD8+ T-cells reflects direct killing of infected cells as opposed to indirect, non-cytolytic mechanisms. In this study, we used functional genomics to investigate potential mechanisms of in vivo viral suppression mediated by CD8+ lymphocytes. Eight chronically SIVmac239-infected RMs underwent CD8+ lymphocyte depletion, and RNA from whole blood was obtained prior to depletion, at the nadir of CD8+ lymphocytes (5 days post-depletion), and during the repopulation phase (11 days post-depletion). Principal components analysis demonstrated that overall gene expression during the nadir of CD8+ T-cells was highly divergent from other intervals. Conversely, the genomic signature of samples from the CD8+ cell rebound phase was similar to that of pre-depletion samples. During CD8+ lymphocyte depletion we detected a strongly significant decrease in the expression of the genes encoding CD8α and CD8β chains, consistent with the near complete CD8+ T-cell depletion measured by flow cytometry. Of note, we observed significant down-regulation of the expression of genes encoding for factors that can suppress SIV replication, including the CCR5-binding chemokine CCL5/Rantes, several retroviral restriction factors (TRIM10, TRIM15, APOBEC3G/H) and defensins. Reduced expression of various genes related to T cell activation and proliferation was also observed. Collectively, these data indicate that depletion of CD8+ lymphocytes in SIV-infected RMs is associated with the establishment of a pattern of gene expression that may result in increased intrinsic permissivity to virus replication.

DESIGN
A total of 60 RNA samples were hybridized on to Rhesus Affymetrix 3' Expression arrays. The study was composed of 8 replicate rhesus macaques subjected to SIVmac239 infection and followed over infection, during subsequent treatment with monocloncal antibody OKT8F to deplete CD8+ T lymphocytes, antiretroviral therapy to suppress virus. Samples were taken at various time points during acute and chronic infection, after CD8+ cell depletion, after CD8+ cell reconstition, and during ART suppression of virus.

