TITLE
Gene expression profiling of bundle sheath and mesophyll cell types of wild-type maize seedlings.

ORGANISM
Zea mays

SUMMARY
A number of taxa utilize C4 photosynthesis, to limit the impact of photorespiration upon photosynthetic performance. In order to achieve a local elevation of CO2 concentration, maize plants possess two photosynthetic cell types. Rubisco accumulation is restricted to bundle sheath (BS) cells that surround the leaf veins. Carbon fixation occurs initially in adjacent mesophyll (ME) cells. C4 compounds are transported into the BS cells where they are subsequently decarboxylated, releasing CO2. Although the major components of the C4 pathway have been well characterized, less is known about further metabolic partitioning in the maize leaf. Microarray hybridizations have been performed in order to further investigate metabolic differences between BS and ME cell types. BS strands and ME protoplasts were isolated from the leaves of 10 day old maize seedlings by mechanical disruption and enzymatic digestion respectively. To control for differences arising from these different protocols, total leaf (TO) and total leaf stress (ST) samples were also isolated. The ST sample was subjected to the same treatments as the ME sample, with the omission of cell-wall degrading enzymes. Leaves for the TO sample were harvested as for the BS strand sample. An interwoven loop design was used to compare the four treatment groups. A biological group consisted of a growth of plants from which pooled individuals were taken for the four treatments. Six biological replicates (groups) were used. Labeling was performed using the Genisphere Array 900-MPX kit according to the manufacturer's protocol. Post hybridization washes were performed according to the recommendations of the Maize Oligo Array Project. Scan settings were used for detection of moderate to high expression signals (gain ~ 60%. power 90%). Following hybridization with TO cDNA, ~1/3 of features provided signal above twice background and below saturation. A number of taxa utilize C4 photosynthesis, to limit the impact of photorespiration upon photosynthetic performance. In order to achieve a local elevation of CO2 concentration, maize plants possess two photosynthetic cell types. Rubisco accumulation is restricted to bundle sheath (BS) cells that surround the leaf veins. Carbon fixation occurs initially in adjacent mesophyll (ME) cells. C4 compounds are transported into the BS cells where they are subsequently decarboxylated, releasing CO2. Although the major components of the C4 pathway have been well characterized, less is known about further metabolic partitioning in the maize leaf. Microarray hybridizations have been performed in order to further investigate metabolic differences between BS and ME cell types. BS strands and ME protoplasts were isolated from the leaves of 10 day old maize seedlings by mechanical disruption and enzymatic digestion respectively. To control for differences arising from these different protocols, total leaf (TO) and total leaf stress (ST) samples were also isolated. The ST sample was subjected to the same treatments as the ME sample, with the omission of cell-wall degrading enzymes. Leaves for the TO sample were harvested as for the BS strand sample. An interwoven loop design was used to compare the four treatment groups. A biological group consisted of a growth of plants from which pooled individuals were taken for the four treatments. Six biological replicates (groups) were used. Labeling was performed using the Genisphere Array 900-MPX kit according to the manufacturer's protocol. Post hybridization washes were performed according to the recommendations of the Maize Oligo Array Project. Scan settings were used for detection of moderate to high expression signals (gain ~ 60%. power 90%). Following hybridization with TO cDNA, ~1/3 of features provided signal above twice background and below saturation. Keywords: Gene expression profiling of bundle sheath and mesophyll cell types

