TITLE
Transgenic mice overexpressing Neuregulin-1 model neurofibroma-malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor progression and implicate specific chromosomal copy number variations in tumorigenesis.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) develop benign plexiform neurofibromas that frequently progress to become malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs).  A genetically engineered mouse model that accurately models plexiform neurofibroma-MPNST progression would facilitate the identification of somatic mutations driving this process.  We have previously reported that transgenic mice overexpressing the growth factor neuregulin-1 in Schwann cells (P0-GGFβ3 mice) develop MPNSTs.   To determine whether P0-GGFβ3 mice accurately model neurofibroma-MPNST progression, cohorts of these animals were followed to death and necropsied.  94% of the mice developed multiple neurofibromas, with 70% carrying smaller numbers of MPNSTs; nascent MPNSTs were identified within neurofibromas, suggesting that these sarcomas arise from neurofibromas.  Although neurofibromin expression was maintained, P0-GGFβ3 MPNSTs, like human NF1-associated MPNSTs, demonstrated Ras hyperactivation.  P0-GGFβ3 MPNSTs also showed abnormalities in the p16INK4A-cyclin D/CDK4-Rb and p19ARF-Mdm-p53 pathways analogous to their human counterparts.  Array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) demonstrated reproducible chromosomal alterations in P0-GGFβ3 MPNST cells (including universal chromosome 11 gains) and focal gains and losses affecting 39 genes previously implicated in neoplasia (e.g., Pten, Tpd52, Myc , Gli1, Xiap, Bbc3/PUMA).  Array CGH also identified recurrent focal copy number variations affecting genes not previously linked to neurofibroma or MPNST pathogenesis.  We conclude that P0-GGFβ3 mice represent a robust model of neurofibroma-MPNST progression that can be used to identify novel genes driving neurofibroma and MPNST pathogenesis.

DESIGN
Array CGH comparison of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) cells vs non-neoplastic Schwann cells

