TITLE
perro-affy-human-186940

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Our laboratory has developed the first mouse model overexpressing a RNA-binding protein, the ELAV-like protein HuD, in the CNS under the control of the CaMKinII alpha promoter. Initial behavioral characterization of the mice revealed that they had significant learning deficits together with abnormalities in prepulse inhibition (PPI). At the molecular level, we found that the expression of the growth-associated protein GAP-43, one of the targets of HuD, was increased in the hippocampus of HuD transgenic mice. To characterize these mice further and to evaluate the utility of these animals in understanding human diseases, we propose to use DNA microarray methods. To test our hypothesis we propose 3 specific aims: 1) To characterize the pattern of gene expression in the hippocampus of HuD overexpressor mice 2) To compare the pattern of gene expression in our mouse model with that in the hippocampus of rats prenatally exposed to alcohol (FAS model) and 3) To compare the pattern of gene expression in our mouse model with that shown in post-mortem tissues of patients with schizophrenia. In our previous protocols we examined the pattern of gene expression in our HuD transgenic mice and in rats prenaltally exposed to alcohol. A report by another group (Hakak et al, 2001) showed that three of the HuD targets were upregulated in the prefrontal cortex of patients with schizophrenia. To evaluate whether other target of HuD may be affected in this illness, in the current protocol, we want to compare the pattern of expression in our transgenic mice with in tissue from patients with schizophrenia Based on the behavioral and molecular properties of our HuD transgenic mice we hypothesize that these animals may be good models for the studying the basis of learning disabilities and of diseases that show deficits in PPI such as fetal alcohol syndrome and schizophrenia. All 28 samples are derived from cerebellar tissues for patients with schizophrenia and matched controls.  The specimens were obtained from the Maryland Brain Collection according to NIH guidelines for confidentially and privacy. The protocol used in these studies was reviewed by our HRRC which found that our studies do not fall within the category of protocols monitored by the IRB (see attached letter form the HRRC). Specimens from 14 patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia performed according to DSM-IV criteria and 14 sex-, age- and PMI-matched controls was included in this study. No differences were found between patients and control subjects in the average age (45±12 versus 43±10 years, p=0.86) or PMI (12±5 versus 16±6 hours, p=0.11). We will provide 28 samples containing 5 ug of RNA each in DEPC water (see validation of the quality of the RNA below). In addition, we include in our study animals treated with haloperidol as control for medication. These samples will be submitted in a separate protocol. Keywords: other

