TITLE
Grape flesh and skin ripening transcriptomic profiling

ORGANISM
Vitis vinifera

SUMMARY
The experiment was aimed at describing similarities and differences between grapevine flesh and skin ripening at the transcriptome level. Transcriptional profiles throughout flesh and skin ripening were followed in three biological replicas during two consecutive growing seasons in a table grape cultivar ‘Muscat Hamburg’. Berries were weekly picked off bunches (one bunch per vine from each selected vine) from june to august. For each sampling, berries were classified in five ripening stages based on monitoring developmental stages instead of a simple chronological sampling. They corresponded to pre-véraison (P), 50% véraison (V1), 100% véraison (V2), ripe 1 (R1), and ripe 2 R2). P samples were harvested as green, hard berries of at least 15 mm in size, according to touch-assessed hardiness. Véraison berries with half or full coloured skin surface corresponded to V1 and V2 samples. After véraison, ripening berries were classified according to their floatability in solutions with different NaCl densities, as an indication of the internal sugar concentration. At this stage berries were sampled with densities between 110-130 g NaCl/L for R1 and between 130-150 g NaCl/L for R2, which corresponded to commercially ripen table grape berries. On each of the five samples, frozen berries were dissected and RNA from flesh and skin was obtained and processed for Grapegen Genechip microarray hybridizations.   ****[PLEXdb( ) has submitted this series at GEO on behalf of the original contributor,  Pablo Carbonell-Bejerano.  The equivalent experiment is VV33 at PLEXdb.]

DESIGN
tissue type name: Flesh - developmental stage name: P(6-replications);  tissue type name: Flesh - developmental stage name: V1(6-replications);  tissue type name: Flesh - developmental stage name: V2(6-replications);  tissue type name: Flesh - developmental stage name: R1(6-replications);  tissue type name: Flesh - developmental stage name: R2(6-replications);  tissue type name: Skin - developmental stage name: P(6-replications);  tissue type name: Skin - developmental stage name: V1(6-replications);  tissue type name: Skin - developmental stage name: V2(6-replications);  tissue type name: Skin - developmental stage name: R1(6-replications);  tissue type name: Skin - developmental stage name: R2(6-replications)

