TITLE
Gene expression profiling of two DLBCL cell lines upon shRNA mediated knockdown of  EZH2

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
We studied transcriptional changes by Affymetrix human microarrays in 2 DLBCL cell lines as a result of shRNA mediated knockdown of EZH2. In eukaryotes, epigenetic post-translational modification of histones is critical for regulation of chromatin structure and gene expression. EZH2 is the catalytic subunit of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) and is responsible for repressing target gene expression through methylation of histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27). Over-expression of EZH2 is implicated in tumorigenesis and correlates with poor prognosis in multiple tumor types. Recent reports have identified somatic heterozygous mutations of Y641 and A677 residues within the catalytic SET domain of EZH2 in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and follicular lymphoma (FL). The Y641 residue is the most frequently mutated residue, with 22% of GCB (Germinal Cell B-cell) DLBCL and FL harboring mutations at this site. These lymphomas exhibit increased H3K27 tri-methylation (H3K27me3) due to altered substrate preferences of the mutant enzymes. However, it is unknown whether direct inhibition of EZH2 methyltransferase activity alone will be effective in treating lymphomas carrying activating EZH2 mutations.  Herein, we demonstrate that GSK126, a potent, highly-selective, SAM-competitive, small molecule inhibitor of EZH2 methyltransferase activity, decreases global H3K27me3 levels and reactivates silenced PRC2 target genes. GSK126 effectively inhibits the proliferation of EZH2 mutant DLBCL cell lines and dramatically inhibits the growth of EZH2 mutant DLBCL xenografts in mice. Together, these data demonstrate that pharmacological inhibition of EZH2 activity may provide a promising treatment for EZH2 mutant lymphoma.

DESIGN
Pfeiffer and KARPAS-422 cells were treated with either shRNA targeting EZH2 (shEZH2) or a non targeting control (shNTC) for 10 days.

