TITLE
HIV downregulates interferon stimulated genes in primary macrophages.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
HIV is able to outpace the innate immune response, including the response mediated by interferon (IFN), to establish a productive infection.  However, monocyte derived macrophages (MDMs) may be protected from HIV infection by treatment with type I IFN before virus exposure.  The ability of HIV to modulate the type I IFN-mediated innate immune response when it encounters a cell that has already been exposed to IFN was investigated.

DESIGN
To investigate the presence of HIV on an established IFN response, MDMs were subjected to four different conditions: (1) IFN-treated only, (2) IFN-treated followed by HIV infection, (3) HIV infected only, and (4) a mock-treated and mock-infected control.  Microarray gene expression analysis was performed on a total of 24 samples derived from the 4 conditions assessed at 3 time points (1, 4 and 8 days following treatment/infection) for both IFN-α2 or -ω.  Initially, ISGs were identified as those that were upregulated greater than 2-fold by IFN alone (condition 1) at both Days 4 and 8.  Then, the IFN-treated condition was compared to the IFN-treated followed by HIV-infection condition in order to identify those ISGs that were downregulated at least 1.5-fold by the presence of HIV at both days.  Assuming that it would be counterproductive for HIV infection by itself to induce the expression of ISGs with putative anti-HIV effects, those ISGs that were upregulated greater than 2-fold in the HIV control were removed.  Finally, ISGs that passed these filters and were concordant with both IFN-treatments (IFN-α2 and -ω) were identified and corresponded to the following 8 ISGs: AXL receptor tyrosine kinase (AXL), interferon-alpha inducible protein 27 (IFI27), interferon-induced protein 44 (IFI44), interferon-induced protein 44-like (IFI44L), ISG15, OAS1, OAS3 and XIAP associated factor 1 (XAF1).  It should be noted that the IFN-α2 and -ω microarray experiments were performed in different batches but batch effects were not corrected since genes were identified by the filtering approach just described within each batch.

