TITLE
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia gene expression profiles

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) shows an incredibly high heterogeneity in the clinical course, spanning from rapidly aggressive to completely indolent behaviour. In order to identify the correspondent gene expression variability, we investigated 29 cases of untreated B-CLL using microarray. Firstly, two robust CLL clusters were identified applying multiple unsupervised clustering algorithms. Their separation was mainly determined by the differential expression of several genes included into two gene groups designated OxPhos and Lyn clusters. OxPhos gene cluster, previously identified in a subset of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, comprises genes coding  for some respiratory chain enzymes, ribosomal proteins and translation factors. Moreover, increased levels of genes involved in the regulation of apoptosis and in the proteasome-ubiquitin complex and the down-regulation of LYN gene, member of B-cell receptor pathway, characterized the OxPhos CLL subset. These B-CLL biological clusters did not reveal any preferential distribution of Ig mutated or Ig unmutated CLL prognostic groups. Furthermore, we applied another unsupervised algorithm (Subtractive Unsupervised Analysis) after the exclusion of genes characterizing the previously identified CLL subsets.  At this point, we could identify two new CLL clusters, showing a clear association to the Ig mutational status. In addition to the ZAP-70 and LPL genes, the patients with unmutated Ig expressed higher level of some interesting genes involved in B cell activation, cell cycle regulation, apoptosis resistance and angiogenesis. In conclusion,  we showed that B-CLL is characterized by an intrinsic heterogeneity in gene expression pattern, which overcomes the influence of the immunoglobulin mutational status on B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia profiles. Keywords: chronic lymphocytic leukemia, gene expressione profile, immunuglobulin mutational status, clinical heterogeneity

