TITLE
Changes in Gene Expression within the Ventral Tegmental Area Following Loss-of-Control Alcohol Drinking by Alcohol-Preferring (P) Rats

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
The objective of this study was to determine changes in gene expression in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) following loss-of-control alcohol drinking by alcohol-preferring (P) rats. Adult female P rats (n = 7) were given concurrent access to 10, 20 and 30% EtOH for four 1-hr sessions daily for 10 weeks followed by 2 cycles of 2 weeks of abstinence and 2 weeks of EtOH access. Rats were killed by decapitation 3 hr after the 4th daily EtOH-access session at the end of the second 2-week relapse period. An age-matched water control group of female P rats (n = 8) was also killed. RNA was prepared from micropunch samples of the VTA from individual rats; analyses were conducted with Affymetrix Rat 230.2 chips. Ethanol intakes were 1.5-2.5 g/kg per sessions, resulting in blood levels > 200 mg% at the end of the 4th session. There were 211 named genes that were significantly different (FDR = 0.1) between the water and EtOH groups. Bioinformatics analyses indicated alterations in (a) transcription factors that reduced excitation-coupled transcription and promoted exocitotic neuronal damage involving clusters of genes associated with Nfkbia, Fos and Srebf1; (b) genes that reduced cholesterol and fatty acid synthesis, and increased protein degradation; and (c) genes involved in cell-to-cell interactions and regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. Among the named genes, there were 62 genes in common with differences between alcohol-naïve P and non-preferring (NP) rats, with 43 of the genes changing in the opposite direction following excessive binge-like drinking. These genes are involved in a pro-inflammatory response, and enhanced response to glucocorticoids and steroid hormones.  Overall, the results of this study indicated that excessive binge-like alcohol drinking by P rats may be altering the expression of genes that promote neuronal damage.

DESIGN
Comparison of Differences in Gene Expression in the Ventral Tegmental Area of Rat Lines Selectively Bred for High or Low Alcohol Consumption

