TITLE
Identification of microRNA responsive to pathogen infection in sugarcane

ORGANISM
Saccharum hybrid cultivar SP70-1143

SUMMARY
Sugarcane is a very efficient crop to produce ethanol. In recent years, extensive efforts have been made in order to increase sugarcane yields. To reach this goal, molecular biology tools have been used comprehensively, identifying genes, pathways and genetic polymorphisms. However, some important molecular components, like microRNAs, have not been deeply investigated. MicroRNAs are an important class of endogenous small, noncoding RNAs that regulate gene expression at the post-transcription level and play fundamental roles in diverse aspects of animal and plant biology. Plant genomes harbor numerous miRNA genes that regulate many protein-coding genes to influence key processes ranging from development, metabolism, and responses to abiotic and biotic stresses. There is wide range of pests and diseases that affect sugarcane, yet the mechanisms that regulate pathogen interactions with sugarcane have not been thoroughly investigated. To gain knowledge on the physiological responses to pathogens mediated by microRNAs in sugarcane, we screened the transcriptoma of sugarcane plants infected with Acidovorax avenae subsp avenae, the causal agent of red stripe disease in sugarcane, and detected several microRNAs modulated in the presence of the pathogen. Furthermore, we validated with qPCR a number of microRNA expression patterns observed by bioinformatics analysis. In addition, we observed high expression levels of several star microRNAs, in numbers larger than the mature microRNAs in some cases. Interestingly, sof-miR408 was consistently down-regulated in the presence of several pathogens, but not in the presence beneficial microbes. This result indicates that the sugarcane senses pathogenic or beneficial microorganisms differentially and triggers specific epigenetic regulatory mechanisms accordingly

DESIGN
Screenning of sRNA transcriptome of sugarcane plants infected with Acidovorax avenae subsp avenae after seven days

