TITLE
Comparative study of sesame lignans affecting gene expression profile and fatty acid oxidation in rat liver

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
The impact of sesamin, episesamin and sesamolin (sesame lignans) on hepatic gene expression profiles was compared with a DNA microarray. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were fed experimental diets containing 0.2% sesamin, episesamin or sesamolin, and a control diet free of lignans for 15 d. Compared to a lignan-free diet, a diet containing sesamin, episesamin and sesamolin caused 1.5- and 2-fold changes in the expression of 128 and 40, 526 and 152, and 516 and 140 genes, respectively. The lignans modified not only the mRNA levels of many enzymes involved in hepatic fatty acid oxidation, but also those of proteins involved in the transportation of fatty acids into hepatocytes and their organelles, and regulate hepatic concentrations of carnitine, CoA and malonyl-CoA. It is apparent that sesame lignans stimulate hepatic fatty acid oxidation by affecting the gene expression of various proteins regulating hepatic fatty acid metabolism. We also observed that lignans modified the gene expression of various proteins involved in hepatic lipogenesis, cholesterogenesis and glucose metabolism. The changes were generally greater with episesamin and sesamolin than with sesamin. In terms of the amounts accumulated in serum and the liver, the lignans ranked in the order sesamolin, episesamin and sesamin. The differences in bio-availability among these lignans appear to be important to their divergent physiological activities.

DESIGN
Male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into 4 groups with equal mean body weights consisting of 7 animals each and fed either a diet free of lignan or diets containing 0.2% lignan (sesamin, episesamin or sesamolin) for 15 d. RNA extracted from the livers of 5 rats from each group was subjected to microarray analyses. Rats with the highest and lowest body weights in each group at the time of killing were eliminated from microarray analyses.

