TITLE
Gene expression profile in spleens of mice 24 hours after total body irradiation.

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
A major challenge in bone allogeneic marrow (BM) transplantation is overcoming engraftment resistance to avoid the clinical problem of graft rejection.  Identifying genes and pathways that regulate BM engraftment may reveal molecular targets for overcoming these engraftment barriers.  Previously, we developed a mouse model of BM transplantation that utilizes recipient conditioning with non-myeloablative total body irradiation followed by transplantation of allogeneic BM cells.  We defined TBI doses that lead to graft rejection, that are permissive for engraftment, and mouse strain variation with regards to the permissive TBI dose.  We now report gene expression analysis, using the Agilent Mouse 8x60K v3 expression arrays, in spleen of mice conditioned with TBI doses for evaluation in correlation to the expected engraftment phenotype.  The spleens of mice given TBI demonstrated extensive differential gene expression, compared with un-irradiated controls, at both multiple testing-corrected P < .05 and fold change greater than or equal to  2 levels. Functional analysis revealed significant enrichment for up-regulation of canonical pathways involved in inflammation, even when treated with TBI doses not permissive for engraftment.  Consistent with this the most significantly associated upstream regulators included lipopolysaccharide, tumor necrosis factor, and a toll-like receptor.  Unique to engrafting mice, however, were enrichment for a down-regulated canonical pathway related to B-cell development.  Results from this analysis have identified canonical pathways and upstream regulators of BM engraftment in mice and may lead to new approaches to overcome the problem of graft rejection complicating clinical BM transplantation.

DESIGN
Each individual sample was pooled from 3 mice and performed in triplicate for each experimental group (TBI 300 cGy, 400 cGy, or 500 cGy) and for each strain mice (BALB.K or B10.BR)  for statistical analysis.  Additional arrays were perfromed for TBI 800 cGy (BALB.K) and TBI 900 cGy (B10.BR) for anlaysis of gene expressive after myeloablative condition.

