TITLE
Genome wide gene expression in a patient with 15q13.3 homozygous microdeletion syndrome

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
We identified a novel homozygous 15q13.3 microdeletion in a young boy with a complex neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by severe cerebral visual impairment with additional signs of congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB), congenital hypotonia with areflexia, profound intellectual disability, and refractory epilepsy. The mechanisms by which the genes in the deleted region exert their effect are unclear. In this paper we probed the role of downstream effects of the deletions as a contributing mechanism to the molecular basis of the observed phenotype.  We analyzed gene expression of lymphoblastoid cells derived from peripheral blood of the proband and his relatives to ascertain the relative effects of the homozygous and heterozygous deletions.

DESIGN
The proband with 15q13.3 homozygous deletion and his parents with 15q13.3 heterozygous deletions described in our previous report 15 were evaluated using Affymetrix aCGH-244K arrays (build hg18).  The aCGH data were validated by qPCR using primers specific to CHRNA7 as previously described. 15   The extended family and comparison subjects were also screened using the CHRNA7 primers. Immortalized lymphoblastoid lines were created from the proband, his mother, father, a paternal half sister, a paternal half brother, a paternal grandmother and two paternal great uncles.   Three lymphoblastoid lines from age- and sex- matched normally developing comparison subjects with normal chromosomes were obtained from the Coriell cell repository [(AG14724 (8 yo),  AG14948 (10 yo),  AG14980 (9 yo)] were used for gene expression comparison with the proband.  The samples from the father, mother and paternal grandmother with heterozygous 15q13.3 deletions were compared to samples from lymphoblastoid cells from adult male and female subjects respectively (normal copy number for 15q13.3 determined by qPCR).

