TITLE
Gene expression profiling in bone-marrow-derived neutrophils of lcn2 deficient mouse

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Lipocalin 24p3 (24p3) is a neutrophil secondary granule protein. 24p3 is also a siderocalin, which binds several bacterial siderophores. It was therefore proposed that synthesis and secretion of 24p3 by stimulated macrophages or release of 24p3 upon neutrophil degranulation sequesters iron-laden siderophores to attenuate bacterial growth. Accordingly, 24p3-deficient mice are susceptible to bacterial pathogens whose siderophores would normally be chelated by 24p3. Specific granule deficiency (SGD) is a rare congenital disorder characterized by complete absence of proteins in secondary granules. Neutrophils from SGD patients, who are prone to bacterial infections, lack normal functions but the potential role of 24p3 in neutrophil dysfunction in SGD is not known. Here we show that neutrophils from 24p3-deficient mice are defective in many neutrophil functions. Specifically, neutrophils in 24p3-deficient mice do not extravasate to sites of infection and are defective for chemotaxis. A transcriptome analysis revealed that genes that control cytoskeletal reorganization are selectively suppressed in 24p3-deficient neutrophils. Additionally, small regulatory RNAs (miRNAs) that control upstream regulators of cytoskeletal proteins are also increased in 24p3-deficient neutrophils. Further, 24p3-deficient neutrophils failed to phagocytose bacteria, which may account for the enhanced sensitivity of 24p3-deficient mice to both intracellular (Listeria monocytogenes) and extracellular (Candida albicans, Staphylococcus aureus) pathogens. Interestingly, Listeria does not secrete siderophores and additionally, the siderophore secreted by Candida is not sequestered by 24p3. Therefore, the heightened sensitivity of 24p3-deficient mice to these pathogens is not due to sequestration of siderophores limiting iron availability, but is a consequence of impaired neutrophil function. Key words: Lipocalin, 24p3, neutrophils, cell motility, chemotaxis, MIRNA-362-3p

DESIGN
To address the role of lipocalin 2 in unstimulated and fMLP-stimulated neutrophils derived from mouse bone marrow, we performed micorarray analysis of gene expression in unstimulated wild type (N=3), unstimulated lcn2 knockout (N=3), fMLP-stimulated wild type (N=2) and fMLP-stimulated lcn2 knockout (N=2) neutrophils. Upon stimulation, neutrophils were treated by fMLP at 10 micromolar for 20 minutes at 37 centigrade.

