TITLE
Comparing gene expression of human cardiac stem cells between automatic cell culture and manual handling culture

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
BACKGROUND: Cell-based regeneration therapies hold great promise and potential for new area in clinical medicine, although some obstacles still remain to be overcome for a wide range of clinical applications. One of the major impediments in this field is difficulties in large-scale production of cells of interest with reproducibility. Current protocol of cell therapy requires a long-time laborious manual process. To solve this problem, we focused on the robotics of automated and high throughput cell culture system. To date, an automated robotic cultivation of stem or progenitor cells in clinical trials has not been reported. METHODS: The system, AutoCulture®, used in this study can automatically replace the medium, centrifuge cells, split the cells, and take a photograph for their morphology. We examined the feasibility to use it in the clinical field by comparing the growth rate and the characteristics of cardiac stem cells (CSCs) cultivated by AutoCulture and the manual handling culture, which protocol is the exact same as current performing clinical trial in our institute. RESULTS: We demonstrated similar characteristics in both culture methods, in terms of growth rates, gene expression profiles, cell surface profiles by FACS, carbon hydrate structures on the cell surface, and genomic DNA stability. IMPLICATIONS: The results of this study showed that AutoCulture is feasible to cultivate human cells for regenerative medicine. An automated cell-processing machine for cell therapy will play more important role, as it will be widespread from multi-center trials to off-the-shelf cell products.

DESIGN
The cells were cultured by manual handling or by the automatic cell culture apparatus. Total RNA was extracted from these cells at day 7 by the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (QIAGEN). Gene expression analysis was performed using the Agilent Whole Human Genome Microarray chips G4112F (Agilent). Raw data were normalized and analyzed by GeneSpring GX11 software.

