TITLE
Microarray profiling of mononuclear peripheral blood cells to identify novel candidate genes related to chemoradiation response in rectal cancer

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells have emerged recently as pathology markers of cancer and other diseases, making possible their use as therapy predictors. Furthermore, the importance of the immune response in radiosensivity of solid organs led us to hypothesized that microarray gene expression profiling of peripheral blood mononuclear cells could identify patients with response to chemoradiation in rectal cancer. 27 patients with locally advanced rectal cancer were recruited initially to perform the study. Peripheral blood samples were obtained before neaodjuvant treatment. RNA was extracted and purified to obtain cDNA and cRNA for hybridization of microarrays included in Human WG CodeLink bioarrays. Quantitative real time PCR was used to validate microarray experiment data. Results were correlated with pathological response, according to Mandard´s criteria and final UICC Stage (patients with tumor regression grade 1-2 and downstaging being defined as responders and patients with grade 3-5 and no downstaging as non-responders).

DESIGN
The group of study consisted of 27 locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC) patients from the Division of Colon & Rectal Surgery, HUVN, Granada, Spain. To qualify for this study, rectal carcinomas had to be on the stage II or stage III according the criteria of the International Union Against Cancer’s (UICC), without systemic metastases in the positron emission tomography scan and no known second neoplasm. The diagnosis of rectal cancer was confirmed by the histopathological analysis of endoscopic biopsies. The study was approved by the local ethics committee. Informed consent was obtained from all patients before the study. After the initial staging, all patients qualifying for this study received neoadjuvant radiotherapy (28 fractions of 1.8 Gy, 5 fractions/week) with concomitant chemotherapy (capecitabine, 825 mg/m2, twice daily alone or in combination with oxaliplatine 50 mg/m2 once weekly). Standardised surgery, including total mesorectal excision, was performed 8 weeks after the standardised CRT protocol described above.

