TITLE
Sost and its paralog Sostdc1 coordinate digit number in a Gli3-dependent manner

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
WNT signaling is critical in most aspects of skeletal development and homeostasis, and antagonists of WNT signaling are emergning as key regulatory proteins with great promise as therapeutic agents for bone disorders. Until recently Sost and its paralog Sostdc1 have been described as growth factors with highly restricted expression in the adult where Sost was assumed 'osteocyte-' and Sostdc1 'kidney-' specific. Here we show that these two proteins emerged throgh ancestral genome duplication and their expression patterns have diverged to span complimentary domains in most organ systems including musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, nervous, digestive, reproductive and respiratory. In the developing limb, Sost and Sostdc1 display dynamic expression patterns with Sost being restricted to the distal ectoderm and Sostdc1 to the proximal ectoderm and the mesenchyme. While Sostdc1-/- mice lack any obvious limb and skeletal defects, Sost-/- mice recapitulate the hand defects described for sclerosteosis patients. However, elevated WNT signaling in Sost-/-; Sostdc1-/- mice causes misregulation of SHH signaling, ectopic activation of Sox9 in the digit 1 field and ultimately preaxial polydactyly. In addition, we show that the syndactyly documented in Sclerosteosis is present in both Sost-/- and Sost-/-; Sostdc1-/- mice, and is driven by misregulation of Fgf8 in the AER, a region lacking Sost and Sostdc1 expression. This study highlights the complexity of WNT signaling in skeletal biology and disease and emphasizes how redundant mechanisms and non-cell autonomous effects can synergize to unveil new intricate phenotypes caused by elevated WNT signaling.

DESIGN
Five arrays were analyzed, consisting of two total embryonic fore-limb RNA (experimental) and three total embryonic forelimb RNA (reference) samples at E11.5 DPC mouse (C57Bl6 strain). Embryos were not pooled to generate samples. Two to three biological replicates for limb bud samples were used. Comparisons were made between WT and double mutant (SostKOSostLKO) limb bud samples.

