TITLE
Gaucher Disease: Transcriptome Analyses Using Microarray or mRNA Sequencing in a Mouse Model Treated with velaglucerase alfa or imiglucerase [Affymetrix]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The comparative whole genome transcriptome effects of two similar pharmaceuticals, imig or vela, on a Gaucher disease mouse model, 9V/null, were evaluated by two commonly used platforms, mRNA-Seq and microarray. Also, statistical methods, DESeq and edgeR for mRNA-Seq and Mixed Model ANOVA for microarray, were compared for differential gene expression detection. The biological pathways were similar between two platforms. Cell growth and proliferation, cell cycle, heme metabolism, and mitochondrial dysfunction were the most altered functions associated with the disease process. Although the two biopharmaceuticals have a very similar structure and function, imig- and vela- treatment in the mice differentially affected disease-specific pathways indicating the action of the two drugs on the disease process in the visceral tissues of Gaucher mouse model differ significantly at the molecular level. This study provides a comprehensive comparison between the two platforms (mRNA-Seq and microarray) for gene expression analysis and addresses the contribution of the different methods involved in the analysis of such data. The results also provide insights into the differential molecular effects of two similar biopharmaceuticals for Gaucher disease treatment.

DESIGN
9V/null mice (Gaucher mouse model) were injected weekly via tail vein with 60U/kg/wk of imig or vela for 8 wks. Control 9V/null mice were injected with same volume of saline. Wt mice were untreated. Age and strain matched mice were used for the study. Also, statistical methods, DESeq and edgeR for mRNA-Seq and Mixed Model ANOVA for microarray, were compared for differential gene expression detection.Cell growth and proliferation, cell cycle, heme metabolism, and mitochondrial dysfunction were the most altered functions associated with the disease process.  The results also provide insights into the differential molecular effects of two similar biopharmaceuticals for Gaucher disease treatment.

