TITLE
Clenbuterol administration in mouse muscle

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Background: Beta-adrenergic receptor agonists (BA) induce skeletal muscle hypertrophy, yet specific mechanisms that lead to this effect are not well understood.  The objective of this research was to identify novel genes and physiological pathways that potentially facilitate BA induced skeletal muscle growth.  We chose to evaluate global changes in gene expression by utilizing the Affymetrix platform to identify gene expression changes in mouse skeletal muscle.  Changes in gene expression were evaluated 24 h (1D) and 10 days (10D) after administration of the BA clenbuterol. Results: Administration of clenbuterol stimulated anabolic activity, as indicated by decreased blood urea nitrogen (BUN; P < 0.01) and increased body weight gain (P < 0.05) 24 h or 10 d, respectively, after initiation of clenbuterol treatment.  A total of 22,787 probesets were evaluated with 113 probesets defined as differentially expressed based on a false discovery rate of 10%.  Differential mRNA abundance of four of these genes was validated in an independent experiment by quantitative PCR.  Patterns of gene expression change observed from the microarray data suggested more genes are differentially regulated after 24 h than 10 d of BA administration.  Functional characterization of differentially expressed genes revealed several categories that participate in biological processes important to skeletal muscle growth, including regulators of transcription and translation, mediators of cell-signaling pathways, and genes involved in polyamine metabolism.  Included within these lists were several genes previously associated with myogenic differentiation, along with multiple genes known to promote a general up-regulation of translation. Conclusions:  Global evaluation of gene expression after administration of clenbuterol identified changes gene expression and overrepresented functional categories of genes that may regulate BA-induced muscle hypertrophy.  Changes in the mRNA abundance of multiple genes associated with myogenic differentiation may indicate an important effect of BA on the proliferation, differentiation, and/or recruitment of satellite cells into muscle fibers to promote muscle hypertrophy.  Additionally, increased mRNA abundance of genes involved in the initiation of translation suggests that increased levels of protein synthesis often associated with BA administration may result from a general up-regulation of translational initiators, rather than a sustained up-regulation of gene expression at the transcriptional level.  Additionally, numerous other genes and physiological pathways were identified that will be important targets for further investigations of the hypertrophic effect of BA on skeletal muscle. Keywords: Compound administration, time course

