TITLE
MicroRNA expression profiles distinguish liposarcoma subtypes and implicate miR-145 and miR-451 as tumor suppressors (validation)

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Liposarcomas are rare, heterogeneous and malignant tumors that can be divided into five histological subtypes with different characteristics and clinical behavior. Treatment consists of surgery in combination with systemic chemotherapy, but nevertheless mortality rates are high. More insight into the biology of liposarcoma tumorigenesis is needed to devise novel therapeutic approaches. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been associated with carcinogenesis in many tumors and may function as tumor suppressor or oncogene. In this study we examined miRNA expression in an initial series of 57 human liposarcomas (including all subtypes), lipomas and normal fat by miRNA microarrays. Supervised hierarchical clustering of the most differentially expressed miRNAs (p < 0.0002) distinguished most liposarcoma subtypes and control tissues. The distinction between well differentiated liposarcomas and benign lipomas was blurred, suggesting these tumor types may represent a biological continuum. MiRNA signatures of liposarcoma subtypes were established and validated in an independent series of 58 liposarcomas and control tissues. The expression of the miR-143/145 and miR-144/451 cluster members was clearly reduced in liposarcomas compared to normal fat. Overexpression of miR-145 and miR-451 in liposarcoma cell lines decreased cellular proliferation rate, impaired cell cycle progression and induced apoptosis. In conclusion, we show that miRNA expression profiling can be used to discriminate liposarcoma subtypes, which could aid in objective diagnostic decision making. In addition, our data indicate that miR-145 and miR-451 act as tumor suppressors in adipose tissue and show that re-expression of these miRNAs could be a promising therapeutic strategy for liposarcomas.

DESIGN
57 samples discovery set, 58 samples in validation set, subdivided in 5 liposarcoma subtypes plus lipomas and normal fat as control samples. Each sample was analysed on one array. All array probes are present in duplicate.

