TITLE
Expression profiling of Chickpea genes differentially regulated during a resistance response to Ascochyta rabiei

ORGANISM
Cicer arietinum

SUMMARY
Using microarray technology and a set of chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.) unigenes, grasspea (Lathyrus sativus L.) ESTs and lentil (Lens culinaris Med.) resistance gene analogs, the ascochyta blight (Ascochyta rabiei (Pass.) L.) resistance response was studied in four chickpea genotypes, including resistant, moderately resistant, susceptible and wild relative (Cicer echinospermum L.) genotypes.  The experimental system minimized environmental effects and was conducted in reference design, where samples from mock-inoculated controls acted as references against post-inoculation samples.  Robust data quality was achieved through the use of three biological replicates (including a dye-swap), the inclusion of negative controls, and strict selection criteria for differentially expressed genes including a fold change cutoff determined by self-self hybridizations, Students t test and multiple testing correction (P < 0.05).  Microarray observations were also validated by quantitative RT-PCR.  The time-course expression patterns of 756 microarray features resulted in differential expression of 97 genes in at least one genotype at one time-point.  K-means clustering grouped the genes into clusters of similar observations for each genotype, and comparisons between A. rabiei-resistant and susceptible genotypes revealed potential gene 'signatures' predictive of effective A. rabiei resistance.  These genes included several pathogenesis-related proteins, SNAKIN2 antimicrobial peptide, proline-rich protein, disease resistance response protein DRRG49-C, environmental stress-inducible protein, leucine-zipper protein, polymorphic antigen membrane protein, as well as several unknown proteins.  The potential involvement of these genes and their pathways of induction are discussed.  This study represents the first large-scale gene expression profiling in chickpea, and future work will focus on functional validation of the genes of interest. Keywords: time course disease state analysis

