TITLE
Expression data from human Jurkat T cells exposed to 31 compounds

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Compounds with direct immunotoxic properties, including metals, mycotoxins, agricultural pesticides and industrial chemicals, form potential human health risks due to exposure through food, drinking water, and the environment. Insights into the mechanisms of action are currently lacking for the majority of these direct immunotoxicants. Therefore, the present work aimed to gain insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying direct immunotoxicity. To this end, we assessed in vitro the effects of 31 test compounds on the transcriptome of the human Jurkat T cell line. These compounds included direct immunotoxicants, immunosuppressive drugs with different mode of actions, and non-immunotoxic control chemicals. Pathway analysis of the microarray data  allowed us to identify canonical pathways and Gene Ontology processes that were transcriptionally regulated in common by immunotoxicants (i) with structural similarities, such as the tributyltins TBTC and TBTO that activated the retinoic acid / X receptor (RAR / RXR) signaling pathway, and (ii) without structural similarities, such as As2O3, DBTC, diazinon, MeHg, ochratoxin A, S9 treated ochratoxin A, S9 treated cyclophosphamide, and S9 treated benzo[a]pyrene, that activated unfolded protein response, and FTY720, lindane, and propanil, that activated the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway. In addition, processes uniquely affected by individual immunotoxicants were identified, such as the induction of Notch receptor signaling and the down regulation of acute phase response genes by ochratoxin A. These findings were validated by quantitative Real-Time PCR (Q-RT-PCR) analysis of genes involved in these processes. Our study indicated that diverse modes of action are involved in direct immunotoxicity and  that a set of pathways or genes, rather than one single gene can be used to screen compounds for direct immunotoxicity. We used microarrays to study the gene expression changes in Jurkat cells upon exposure to various immunotoxicants and identified distinct pathways related with chemical-induced direct immunotoxicity.

DESIGN
Jurkat cells were exposed to 31 compounds. The exposure experiments were done on four different days, with four different passages of Jurkat cells. Therefore, for each compound, we have four biological replicates. DMSO was used as the carrier control for all the samples. In total, 128 samples (including four untreated cell samples) were analyzed and will be uploaded. All the data were normalized by the average of the carrier control (DMSO).

