TITLE
Gene expression of 4, 5, and 6 days differentiated Flk1+ WT ES cells, and of 6 days differentiated Flk1+ Runx1-/- and Tal-1-/- ES cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
In order to identify genes that are activated in differentiating WT ESCs, but are missing in Tal-1-/- and Runx1-/- ESCs, and which might be involved in the generation of definitive hematopoietic progenitors and their specification thereafter, we performed microarray analyses on purified Flk-1+ cells, differentiated from these ESCs for 4, 5, and 6 days “in vitro”.

DESIGN
Gene-expression profiling of three biological replicates was performed at days 4, 5, and 6 during the differentiation process of WT J1 ESCs (9 samples), and at day 6 during the differentiation process of either Runx1-/- J1 or Tal-1-/- J1 ESCs (3 samples each). Total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen). The integrity and amount of isolated RNA was assessed for each sample using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Waldbronn, Germany) and a NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE). Complementary DNA was synthesized from 3-5 μg total RNA, using reagents recommended in the technical manual GeneChip Expression Analysis (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). The in vitro transcription, necessary for the synthesis of biotinylated complementary RNA (cRNA) was performed using the Enzo RNA Transcript Labeling kit (Affymetrix). Fifteen micrograms of fragmented cRNA of each sample were hybridized to nine Mouse Genome 430-2 arrays (Affymetrix). Hybridization was performed in a Hybridization Oven 640, and chips were washed and stained in the Fluidics Station 400 (both Affymetrix), according to procedure 2 as described in the technical manual. Finally, the arrays were scanned with a GeneChip Scanner 3000 using the GCOS software, both Affymetrix. All relevant GCOS data of quality checked microarrays were analyzed with High Performance Chip Data Analysis (HPCDA, unpublished), using the BioRetis database (www.bioretis-analysis.de), as described and validated previously (55). Used query parameters for database filtering process was described earlier several times (56). For hierarchical cluster analysis, we used the program Genes@Work (57) with gene vectors for normalization and Pearson w/mean for similarity measure. As cluster type, we used center of mass.

