TITLE
Gene expression profile of ‘heat stress’ in the Red Sea coral Stylophora pistillata

ORGANISM
Stylophora pistillata

SUMMARY
Over the past several decades, corals worldwide have been affected by global warming, experiencing severe bleaching events that have often lead to coral death. The symbiotic Red Sea coral Stylophora pistillata is considered an opportunistic ‘r’ strategist, thriving in relatively unstable and unpredictable environments, and it is considered a stress-tolerant species. This study aimed to examine S. pistillata gene expression and to clarify the cellular pathways that are active during short-term heat stress caused by an increase from 24°C to 34°C over a 10-day period. Total RNA was extracted from heat-stressed coral fragments, labeled and hybridized against a designated S. pistillata custom microarray containing approximately 12,000 genes. Our results show that the heat stress reaction was sighted from 32°C and intensified significantly after 34°C treatment. Protein interaction networks of up- and down-regulated genes were constructed. The main clustering groups of up-regulated genes were ER stress and ER protein folding, cell cycle, ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, cell death and cell death regulation and cellular stress response genes. These genes were enriched in cellular pathways related to the unfolded protein response (UPR) in the ER, ER-associated degradation (ERAD) and ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. An analysis of the down-regulated genes yielded different clusters of genes related to extracellular matrix and actin organization, collagen, negative regulation of cell death and the Notch and Wnt signaling pathways. Genes encoding redox regulation proteins and molecular chaperones may be considered accurate “early warning genes”, while genes related to sensing and repairing DNA damage are severe heat-related genes. Here, we suggest that during short-term heat stress, S. pistillata might divert cellular energy into mechanisms such as UPR and ERAD at the expense of growth and biomineralization processes in an effort to recover from the stress.

DESIGN
Three-condition experiment, 28°C, 32°C and 34°C vs. 24°C short-term heat stress on Red Sea coral Stylophora pistillata. Data from three biological replicates and two to four technical replicates were used for each temperaure treatment.

