TITLE
Comparison of stem/progenitor cell number and transcriptomic profile in mammary tissue of dairy and beef breed heifers

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
Bovine mammary stem cells (MaSC) are a source of ductal and lobulo-alveolar tissue during development of mammary gland and its remodeling in repeating lactation cycles. We hypothesize that the number of MaSC, their molecular properties and interactions with their niche may be essential to determine the mammogenic potential in heifers. To verify this hypothesis we compared the number of MaSC and transcriptomic profile in mammary tissue of 2-year-old, non-pregnant dairy (Holstein-Friesian) and beef (Limousin) heifers. For identification and quantification of putative stem/progenitor cells in mammary tissue sections scanning cytometry was used with a new combination of MaSC molecular markers: stem cell antigen-1 (Sca-1) and fibronectin type III domain containing 3B (FNDC3B) protein. Double labeled cells were located mainly in the basal layers of mammary epithelium. Cytometric analysis of Sca-1pos FNDC3Bpos cells revealed significantly higher number in HF (2.94±0.35%) than in LM (1.72±0.20%) heifers. More advanced development of mammary tissue in HF heifers was accompanied by higher expression of intramammary hormones, growth factors, cytokines, chemokines and transcription regulators. The model of transcriptomic niche favorable for MaSC was associated with regulation of genes involved in MaSC maintanence, self renewal, proliferation, migration, differentiation, mammary tissue remodeling, angiogenesis, regulation of adipocyte differentiation, lipid metabolism and steroid and insulin signaling. In conclusion the high mammogenic potential in postpubertal dairy heifers is facilitated by a higher number of MaSC and up-regulation of mammary auto-, paracrine factors representing MaSC niche. Keywords: stem/progenitor cells, transcriptomics, mammary gland, dairy and beef heifers

DESIGN
Two-condition experiment, HF vs. LIM. Pulled quarters of mammary glands form 10 LIM heifers (reference) and 10 HF heifers (test). Sample 3 and 4 are dye swaps.

