TITLE
In search of epigenetic marks in testes and sperm cells of differentially fed boars [Agilent]

ORGANISM
Sus scrofa

SUMMARY
We investigated the nutritional effects on gene expression in testes of F0 boars from a three generation Large White pig feeding experiment. A group of experimental (E) F0 boars were fed a standard diet supplemented with high amounts of methylating micronutrients whereas a control (C) group of F0 boars received a standard diet. These differentially fed F0 boars sired F1 boars which then sired 60 F2 pigs which were investigated in a previous study. The aim of this project was to investigate if the nutrition affects gene expression in testis of differentially fed boars and thus impact on spermatogenesis. We found a small number of 70 genes that were differentially expressed (fc ≥ 1) on the P < 0.01 significance level. The false discovery rate (FDR) was 0.82 indicating that only a small portion of these genes are real positives. Nevertheless, we performed a pathway analysis and found this moderate differential expression associated with pathways maps of development_A2B receptor: action via G-protein alpha s, cell adhesion_Tight junctions and cell adhesion_Endothelial cell contacts by junctional mechanisms. The gene ontology (GO) processes that matched the gene expression data in boars’ testes were positive regulation of nucleobase-containing compound metabolic process, cellular response to hormone stimulus and cellular process. The pathway maps and GO processes associated with gene expression differences do not indicate a simple relationship between nutritional influences and gene expression in testes. Nevertheless the Adenosine A2B receptor influences cell differentiation and proliferation and has thus far reaching consequences. Similar applies to those GO processes positive regulation of nucleobase-containing compound metabolic process, cellular response to hormone stimulus and cellular process that were associated with differentially expressed genes between the testes samples. The expression result is thus not conclusive of whether the diet affects processes related to transmittable epigenetic marks. The results, however, indicate that the extreme supplementation of methylating micronutrients from month one to month ten of age has a very moderate (if any) effect on gene expression in boar testes as measured by microarray analysis.

DESIGN
Gene expression in testes from differentially fed F0 boars was measured. F0 boars received either a standard diet or a standard diet supplemented with methylating micronutrients. These boars were used to study transgenerational epigenetic inheritance in a three generation pig pedigree. Therefore it was of interest if the diet affects gene expression in testes and so could impact spermatogenesis.

