TITLE
Decoding the transcriptional program of epidermal cell morphogenesis

ORGANISM
Drosophila melanogaster

SUMMARY
Developmental programs are implemented by regulatory interactions between Transcription Factors (TFs) and their target genes, which remain yet poorly understood. While recent studies have focused on regulatory cascades of TFs that govern early development, little is known on how these are selected and controlled the ultimate cellular effectors of terminal differentiation. We addressed this question during late Drosophila embryogenesis when the finely tuned expression of a TF, Ovo/Shavenbaby (Svb), triggers the morphological differentiation of epidermal trichomes. We used chromatin immunoprecipitation and microarray profiling to identify Svb downstream target genes and show that Svb directly regulates a large set of terminal effectors of trichome formation. Functional assays delineated 18 Svb bound sequences driving specific expression of trichome effectors, with highly similar pattern and dynamics. Coupling computational modeling to functional dissection, we further investigated the regulatory logic of these enhancers. We find that these “terminal” enhancers harbor remarkable features with respect to their functional architectures. Trichome enhancers display weak if any clustering of Svb binding sites. Moreover, the in vivo function of each site relies on its intimate context, with a critical importance of the nucleotides flanking Svb binding sites. Finally, we identify additional cis-regulatory motifs, showing a broad diversity of positioning among trichome enhancers, and that critically contribute to their activity. Taken together, these results show that trichome formation is underpinned by unexpectedly diverse modes of regulation, and shed light on the functional architecture of enhancers governing a terminal differentiation program.

DESIGN
Chromatin from 12-14 hour old embryos expressing svb tagged with GFP (Kondo T, Plaza S, Zanet J, Benrabah E, Valenti P, Hashimoto Y, Kobayashi S, Payre F, Kageyama Y: Small peptides switch the transcriptional activity of Shavenbaby during Drosophila embryogenesis. Science 2010, 329:336-339) was collected in duplicate.  Chromatin was immunoprecipitated using an antiGFP antibody and input chromatin was used as a control.

