TITLE
RNA Profiles Reveals Familial Aggregation of Molecular Subtypes in non-BRCA1/2 Breast Cancer Families

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
In more than 70% of families with a strong history of breast and ovarian cancers, pathogenic mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2 cannot be identified, even though hereditary factors are expected to be involved. It has been proposed that tumors with similar molecular phenotypes also share similar pathophysiological mechanisms. Grouping into molecularly homogeneous subsets may therefore be of potential value for further genetic analysis in order to identify new high penetrance breast cancer genes. In the current study, the aim was to investigate if global RNA profiling can be used to identify functional subgroups within breast tumors from families tested negative for BRCA1/2 germline mutations and how these subgroupings relate to different breast cancer patients within the same family. By analyzing a collection of 70 breast tumor biopsies from 58 families, we show that distinct functional subgroupings, similar to the intrinsic molecular breast cancer subtypes, exist. The distribution of subtypes was markedly different from the distribution found among BRCA1/2 mutation carriers. From 11 breast cancer families, breast tumor biopsies from more than one affected family member were included in the study. Notably, in 8 of these families we found that patients from the same family shared the same tumor subtype, showing a tendency of familial aggregation of tumor subtypes (p-value = 1.7e-3). Our finding indicates involvement of hereditary factors in these families in which family members may carry genetic susceptibility not just to breast cancer but to a particular subtype of breast cancer. Using our previously developed BRCA1/2-signatures, we identified 7 non-BRCA1/2 tumors with a BRCA1-like molecular phenotype and provide evidence for epigenetic inactivation of BRCA1 in three of the tumors. In addition, 7 BRCA2-like tumors were found. This is the first study to provide a biological link between breast cancers from family members of high risk non-BRCA1/2 families in a systematic manner, suggesting that future genetic analysis may benefit from subgrouping families into molecularly homogeneous subtypes in order to identify new high penetrance susceptibility genes.

DESIGN
Gene expression profiling of 253 breast tumor samples. Breast tumor tissue from 125 patients with germline mutations in BRCA1 (n = 33) or BRCA2 (n = 22) or with no detectable germline mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2 (n = 70) were included in the study. Serving as a representative control group, primary breast tumor samples (n = 128) were randomly selected among available samples originating from the same department and time period as for the hereditary samples. The study was conducted using Agilent-029949 Custom SurePrint G3 Human GE 8x60K Microarray platform.

