TITLE
Remodeling of synaptic transmission genomic fabrics in a model of infantile spasms

ORGANISM
Rattus norvegicus

SUMMARY
We profiled the whole transcriptomes of male rat hypothalamic arcuate nuclei to determine the remodeling of the genomic fabrics responsible for the glutamatergic, GABAergic, dopaminergic, cholinergic and serotonergic transmission in epilepsy and recovery following different treatments. The rats were prenatally exposed (G15) to betamethasone (or just saline for control) followed by repeated adiministration of N-Methyl-D-Aspartic acid on postnatal days 12, 13 and 15 which triggered infantile spasms. Pups were treated with either ATCH, PMX53 (a potent C5ar1 antagonist) or saline to act as a control, on days 13, 14 and 15 prior to NMDA administration to determine what effects each treatment had on transcriptome recovery. Our Genomic Fabric Paradigm (GFP) is proposed as a transformative research approach to enhance the understanding of the brain transcriptomic alterations in epileptic rats and recovery following various treatments. The genomic fabric of a particular synapse is the structured transcriptome associated with the most interconnected and stably expressed gene network responsible for that type of neurotransmission. GFP refines the description of functional pathways by selecting the most prominent genes and determining their networking.  Moreover, it quantifies the remodeling of functional pathways and their interplay in disease and recovery in response to a treatment. We found that priming with betamethasone had substantial consequences on the topology of the genomic fabrics of all kind of synaptic transmission and that NMDA-induced spasms strongly exacerbated the remodeling of these fabrics. However, ACTH treatment, which is effective in significantly improving seizure outcomes, recovered 49% of the normal transcriptome in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus. Surprisingly, PMX53 treatment recovered 64% of the normal transcriptome despite having no significant effect on behavioural seizure outcomes.

DESIGN
One tissue (hypothalamic arcuate nucleus) x two prenatal exposures (B = betamethasone, S = saline) x two conditions for the betamethasone expossed rats (with (Y) without (N) infantile spasms) x three postnatal treatments (A = ACTH, P = PMX53, S = saline) x one sex (M) . Biological replicates: 4 ASNSM, 4 ABNSM, 4 ABYSM, 4 ABYAM, 4 ABYPM. We have used the " multiple yellow " design in which differently labeled RNAs from two biological samples are co-hybridized with the array and then CY3 and Cy5-labeled samples are compared separately and the results averaged.

