TITLE
Prepartum body condition score and plane of nutrition affect the hepatic transcriptome during the transition period in grazing dairy cows

ORGANISM
Bos taurus

SUMMARY
A transcriptomic approach was used to evaluate potential interactions between prepartum body condition score (BCS) and feeding management in the weeks before calving on hepatic metabolism during the transition period. Thirty-two mid-lactation grazing dairy cows of mixed age and breed were randomly allocated to one of four treatment groups in a 2 × 2 factorial arrangement: two prepartum BCS categories [4.0 (thin, BCS4) and 5.0 (optimal, BCS5); based on a 10-point scale], and two levels of energy intake during the 3 wk preceding calving (75 and 125% of estimated requirements). Liver samples were obtained at -7, 7, and 28 d relative to parturition and subsequent RNA was hybridized to the Agilent 44K Bovine (V2) Microarray chip. The Dynamic Impact Approach was used for pathway analysis, and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis was used for gene network analysis. The greater number of differentially expressed genes in BCS4 cows in response to prepartum feed allowance indicated that these animals were more responsive to prepartum nutrition management than optimally-conditioned cows. However, independent of prepartum BCS, pathway analysis revealed that prepartal feeding level had a marked effect on carbohydrate, amino acid, lipid, and glycan metabolism. Altered carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism indicated a greater and more prolonged negative energy balance post-calving in BCS5 cows overfed prepartum. This was indicated by opposite effects of pre-calving feeding in in BCS4 compared with BCS5 cows in amino acid, vitamin, and co-factor metabolism. The prepartum feed restriction ameliorated the metabolic adaptation to the new lactation in BCS5 cows, while detrimentally affecting BCS4 cows, which seemed to adapt better when overfed. Moreover, alterations in the glycosaminoglycans synthesis pathway support this idea, indicating better hepatic health status in feed-restricted BCS5 cows and overfed BCS4 animals. IPA network analysis indicated liver damage in feed-restricted thin cows, likely due to metabolic overload. Overall, the data indicate that overfeeding in late-pregnancy should be limited to underconditioned animals, while cow with optimal degree of body condition should be maintained on an energy restricted diet.

DESIGN
150 mixed breed mid-lactation grazing dairy cows were balanced for age, breed, BCS at the time of enrollment, and expected calving date. Cows were randomly allocated to one of six treatment groups (25 cows per group) in a 2 × 3 factorial arrangement: two pre-calving BCS categories (4.0 and 5.0, BCS4 and BCS5; based on a 10-point scale, where 1 is emaciated and 10 obese) and three levels of energy intake during the three wk preceding calving (75, 100, and 125% of estimated requirements). The different groups were obtained by daily manipulation of pasture allowance. A subset of 32 animals with the complete set of biopsies (8 cows in each of four treatment groups) was used for transcriptomic analysis. These were cows with prepartum BCS4 fed to meet 75 (B4F75) or 125 (B4F125) % of requirements, and cows with prepartum BCS5 fed to meet 75 (B5F75) or 125 (B5F125) % of requirements. The intermediate groups in both BCS classes (B4F100 and B5F100) were omitted from the present analysis as feeding to the exact requirements is rarely achievable in field conditions. In practice, multiple factors (e.g., pasture management and allocation, animal competition and social interaction) cause cows being mostly overfed or underfed. Liver tissue was harvested via percutaneous biopsy under local anesthesia at -7, 7, and 28 d relative to parturition.

