TITLE
A Systems Biology Understanding of Hypothalamic Inflammation Following Transient Hypoxia in the Late-Gestation Fetal Sheep

ORGANISM
Ovis aries

SUMMARY
The physiological response to hypoxia in the fetus has been extensively studied with regard to redistribution of fetal combined ventricular output and sparing of oxygen delivery to fetal brain and heart. However, little is known about the biochemical and molecular response of the fetal brain to transient hypoxia. The present study was designed to use transcriptomics and systems biology modeling to identify major biological responses of the fetal hypothalamus to transient hypoxia. We also investigated the effect of ketamine, an FDA approved anesthetic that has anti-inflammatory properties in various tissues. Chronically catheterized fetal sheep (122±5 days gestation) were subjected to 30 min hypoxia (relative reduction in PaO2 ~50 %) caused by infusion of nitrogen into the inspired gas of the pregnant ewe. Messenger RNA was isolated from fetal hypothalamus collected 24 hours after hypoxia, and was analyzed for gene expression using the Agilent 15.5k ovine microarray. Hypoxia increased expression of 280 and decreased expression of 357 genes. Genes increased by hypoxia were associated with immune responses, consistent with stimulation by lipopolysaccharide. Pretreatment of the fetuses with ketamine reduced immune/inflammation responses. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the number of microglia/macrophages in the anterior hypothalamus was increased by hypoxia and that the increase was blunted by ketamine. We conclude that transient hypoxia stimulates an inflammatory/immune response in the fetal hypothalamus and that transcriptomics/systems biology modeling is a useful and valid tool for investigation of biological function in the fetal sheep.

DESIGN
4 groups: hypoxia, hypoxia plus ketamine, normoxia, normoxia plus ketamine. Hypoxia produced by low PO2 in maternal inspired gas for 30 min, followed by normoxia recovery for 23.5 hours. Control fetuses maintained at normoxia for 30 min, followed by another 23.5 h of normoxia. Fetal hypothalamus collected for mRNA at end of 23.5 h recovery period.

