TITLE
Induction of tobacco genes by Agrobacterium oncogene 6b

ORGANISM
Solanum tuberosum

SUMMARY
Tumor induction by Agrobacterium is due to transfer of T-DNA genes. We study the 6b T-DNA oncogene that induces tumors on species like Nicotiana glauca, but for which no precise growth induction mechanism has been found sofar. The 6b gene belongs to a larger group of T-DNA genes including rolB, rolC and orf13, no homologies are known with other genes. In N. tabacum, 6b modifies responses to auxins and cytokinins and induces strong morphological changes including cell enlargement, abnormal division, double flowers, enations and root shortening (Helfer et al., 2003, Grémillon et al., 2004). Others have localized 6b and rolB proteins in the nucleus, where they could modify transcription (Kitakura et al., 2002, Moriuchi et al., 2004).  Recently, we developed a system to study early  6b-induced growth changes, using a dexamethasone-inducible 6b gene (dex-T-6b). Leaves of homozygous dex-T-6b plants are infiltrated with a 10 mM MgSO4 solution, with or without 20 micromolar dex. In the presence of dex, a reproducible increase in glucose and fructose concentrations is observed. Such changes are also found in cultured leaf discs and in that case accompanied by an increase in expansion. 6b-induced changes are detected as early as 7 hours after dex infiltration. Western analysis shows that dex-T-6b plants have undetectable 6b protein levels without induction, and rapidly accumulate 6b protein upon induction. We propose to study gene expression in induced and non-induced leaves at different times of induction: 0-3-6-9 and 12 hours. The data will be used to establish whether the 6b gene induces specific genes, and whether these genes are involved in hexose changes and cell expansion. We will also test the effect of infiltrating tobacco leaves with 10 mM MgSO4 by comparison with non-infiltrated leaf tissues in order to correct for changes due to the infiltration procedure. Keywords: Reference design

