TITLE
Identification of MCIP1 as an ATF6-inducible ER Stress Response Gene in the Heart by Gene Expression Profiling

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
We recently found that the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response (ERSR) is activated in surviving cardiac myocytes in a mouse model of in vivo myocardial infarction.  ATF6 is an ER stress-activated transcription factor that induces ERSR genes, some of which encode proteins that may protect against ischemic damage.  However, few ERSR genes have been identified in the heart, and there have been no gene expression profiling studies of ATF6-inducible genes, in vivo.  We previously generated transgenic (TG) mice that express tamoxifen-activated ATF6, ATF6-MER, in the heart; ATF6-MER conferred tamoxifen-dependent ATF6 activation and protection from ischemic damage.  To understand of the mechanism of ATF6-mediated cardioprotection, gene expression profiling of ATF6-MER TG mouse hearts was performed.  Activated ATF6 changed expression levels of 1,162 genes in the heart; of the 775 ATF6-inducible genes, only 23 are known ERSR genes.  One of the genes not expected to be induced by ATF6 is modulatory calcinuerin-interacting protein-1 (MCIP1).  MCIP1 is induced in a calcineurin/NFAT-dependent manner during myocardial hypertrophy and it can feedback inhibit cardiomyocyte growth.  We found that MCIP1 expression in cultured cardiomyocytes was increased by the prototypical ER stresser, tunicamycin (TM), or by simulated ischemia.  Moreover, infecting cardiomyocytes with adenovirus encoding activated ATF6 induced MCIP1 expression and inhibited myocyte growth in response to the alpha 1-adrenergic agonist, phenylephrine.  These results suggest that MCIP1 can be induced in the heart by ER stresses, such as ischemia.  Moreover, b integrating hypertrophy and ER stress, MCIP-modulated myocyte growth may help rejuvenate nascent ER protein folding, which could contribute to protection from ischemic damage. Keywords: Gene expression analysis of the effect of activating ATF6 in the hearts of transgenic mice upon treatment with tamoxifen.

