TITLE
Sustained L-type Calcium Channel Blockade Alters Gene Regulation in the Adult Mouse Ventricle

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Objective: L-type calcium channels (LTCC) homeostatically regulate calcium on a beat by beat basis, but also provide Ca that over long time scales may contribute to transcriptional regulation.  We previously showed that sustained LTCC blockade (CCB) elicits LTCC remodeling in ventricular cardiac myocytes (CM).  Here we hypothesize that sustained CCB has broad effects on the expression of genes involved in calcium handling.  Methods and Results: Therefore, we subjected adult mice to sustained CCB for 24 hours and performed gene expression profiling.  In comparison to vehicle-only control animals, 231 genes were up-regulated, and 111 genes were down-regulated by sustained LTCC blockade (p < 0.01).  Gene ontology analysis suggested that the CaMKIIdelta signaling pathway was up-regulated in these cells.  Unexpectedly, phosphorylation of phospholamban (PLN) at threonine17 (Thr17), an index of CaMKIIdelta activity, was not changed by sustained CCB; however, the degree of phosphorylation of the neighboring PLN-Ser16 substrate site for PKA was significantly reduced by sustained CCB compared to control.  Gene expression profiling suggested no change in PKA, but it showed that protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) mRNA increased, and immunoblots demonstrated that PP2Ac-alpha protein was significantly increased by sustained CCB.  Consistent with elevated PP2Ac-alpha protein expression LTCC exhibited decreased phosphorylation of the C-terminal Ser1928 PKA substrate site.  Conclusions: We conclude that sustained CCB elicits a spectrum of transcriptional events, including compensatory up-regulation of LTCC and PP2Ac-alpha.  Although this study is restricted to mouse, these results suggest the new hypothesis that clinically-relevant sustained LTCC blockade in humans results in changes in gene regulation in the heart. Keywords: L-type calcium channel, calcium channel blockade, verapamil

