TITLE
Mount Sinai Hospital (MSH) Population Specimen Collection and Profiling of Inflammatory Bowel Disease

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
This study focuses on inflammatory bowel disease gene expression profiling. Surgical specimens from 134 patients undergoing bowel resection for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and non IBD controls at Mount Sinai Medical Center were collected as the source of tissue.  Control samples (CLs) were harvested from normal non inflamed bowel located more than 10 cm away from the tumor from patients undergoing bowel resection for sporadic colon cancer. Ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s (CD) patient samples were all isolated from areas containing moderate to severe inflammation. The diagnostic pathology report for each specimen was provided by the Mount Sinai Hospital Pathology Department.  Patients with UC and patients with CD shared common medications including corticosteroids, infliximab, azathioprine, and mesalamine.

DESIGN
Surgical specimens from 134 patients undergoing bowel resection for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and non IBD controls at Mount Sinai Medical Center were collected as the source of tissue. Control samples (CLs) were harvested from normal non inflamed bowel located more than 10 cm away from the tumor from patients undergoing bowel resection for sporadic colon cancer. Ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s (CD) patient samples were all isolated from areas containing moderate to severe inflammation. The diagnostic pathology report for each specimen was provided by the Mount Sinai Hospital Pathology Department. Patients with UC and patients with CD shared common medications including corticosteroids, infliximab, azathioprine, and mesalamine. The samples were collected fresh and the tissue was further processed for isolation. A representative 0.5 cm tissue fragment was isolated from the collected surgical specimen samples, flash frozen and stored at -80C. Tissue was homogenized in Trizol following the manufacturer's protocol (Life Technologies) and RNA extraction was performed. RIN scores > 7 were used for Poly A RNA-seq.

