TITLE
Single Base-Resolution Methylome of the cysticercus reveals a specific epigenomic map

ORGANISM
Taenia solium

SUMMARY
Similar to other metazoan pathogens, cysticercus undergoes transcriptional and developmental regulation during its complex lifecycle and host interactions. DNA methylation as a mechanism to control these processes has, to date, been discounted in this parasite. Given the new availability of high-resolution methylation detection methods, here we show the first evidence for cytosine methylation in the Taenia solium genome. Transcriptional coregulation of novel DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt2), DNA Methyltransferase 3 (DNMT3) and methyl-CpG-binding domain proteins mirrors the detection of cytosine methylation abundance and implicates the presence of functional DNA methylation machinery. Here, using MethylC-seq, we present the first study to confirm the existence of DNA methylation in the cysticercus of Taenia solium genome. we conservatively estimate that 0.11% of genomic cytosines are methylcytosines, most(56%) of which occur in CpA dinucleotides.in non-expressed gene cohorts mCG hypermethlated in gene bodies. and DNA methylation level with a negtive correlation with expression, suggesting it has a positive role in gene transcription. We find that transposable elements are hypomethylated, but in contrast, ribosomal DNAs are densely methylated.  This work contributes to our understanding of epigenetics in platyhelminth such as cysticercus, which is an important human parasite. raises the possibility that targeting DNA methylation processes may be a useful strategy in therapeutics of cysticercosis.  Finally, our work constitutes the first integrated report, to our knowledge, of DNA methylation in a cysticercus, demonstrates a strategy for sequencing the epigenomes of had methylation not on CpG. provide a foundation for future studies exploring this key epigenetic modification in human cysticercus disease and development.

DESIGN
Whole genome bisulfite sequencing and RNA-seq of cysticercus

