TITLE
Metabolic alterations in aged human skin in vivo

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Aging human skin undergoes significant morphological and functional changes such as wrinkle formation, reduced wound healing capacity, and altered epidermal barrier function. Besides known age-related alterations like DNA-methylation changes, metabolic adaptations have been more recently linked to impaired skin function in old humans. Understanding of these metabolic adaptations in aged skin are of special interest, because topical treatments  could reverse age-dependent metabolic changes of human skin in vivo to affect age associated skin disorders. Results: We investigated the global metabolic adaptions in human skin during aging with a combined transcriptomic and metabolomic approach applied to epidermal tissue samples of young and old human volunteers. Our analysis confirmed known age-dependent metabolic alterations, e.g. reduction of coenzyme Q10 levels, and also revealed novel age effects that are seemingly important for skin maintenance. Integration of donor-matched transcriptome and metabolome data highlighted transcriptionally-driven alterations of metabolism during aging such as altered activity in upper glycolysis and glycerolipid biosynthesis or decreased protein and polyamine biosynthesis. Together, we identified several age-dependent metabolic alterations that might affect cellular signaling, epidermal barrier function, and skin structure and morphology. Conclusion: Our study provides a global resource on the metabolic adaptations and its transcriptional regulation  during aging of human skin. Thus, it represents a first step towards an understanding of the impact of metabolism on impaired skin function in aged humans and therefore will potentially lead to improved treatments of age related skin disorders

DESIGN
Gene expression in epidermal skin samples from the inner forearms 24 young (20 to 25 years) and 24 old (55 to 66 years) human volunteers were analysed using Agilent Whole Human Genome Oligo Microarrays 8x60K V2.

