TITLE
Identification of differentially expressed key-lncRNAs in lung adenocarcinoma

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Lung cancer is a heterogeneous disease with high mortality rate globally. Lung adenocarcinoma (ADC) is the most common histological subtype of lung cancer. Multiple studies indicate that lncRNAs emerge as a novel class of critical regulators of cancer. However, the expression of lncRNAs has not been comprehensively surveyed in ADC at a genome-wide scale. Herein we examined landscapes of the lncRNAs and their potential target genes in an integrative fashion in ADC. The differences expression level of lncRNAs and mRNA were determined by microarray. qRT-PCR was performed to validate the lncRNAs expression level in a cohort of 42 tumor tissues and adjacent normal lung tissues. R and Bioconductor were used for data analysis. TF-lncRNAs-gene networks were generated by Cytoscape software. A total of 3045 lncRNAs were differentially expressed between tumor and normal tissues (1048 up and 1997 down). The qRT-PCR of 9 lncRNAs results showed that the expression patterns of these lncRNAs were consistent with the microarray data. Meanwhile, we find NONHSAT077036 expression was associated with N classification and clinical stage. Further, we analyzed the potential co-regulatory relationship between the lncRNAs and target genes using the ‘cis’ and ‘trans’ model. In the 25 related transcription factors (TFs), our analysis in TCGA database found that patients with lower expression of POU2F2 and higher expression of TRIM28 had a shorter overall survival time, suggesting that POU2F2 and TRIM28 could be biomarkers for poor prognosis of ADC. Hence, “POU2F2-lncRNAs” “TRIM28-lncRNAs” two element networks and “POU2F2-lncRNAs-mRNAs” “TRIM28-lncRNAs-mRNAs” there element relationship tables were generated.

DESIGN
Overall, 12 adenocarcinoma and non-tumor tissue samples were selected for the analyses. The experiment was repeated 6 times. Samples were assayed using OE Human lncRNAs Microarray V4.0 with 78243 probe-sets of lncRNAs and 32776 probe-sets of mRNAs.

