TITLE
Dissecting Gene Expression Changes Accompanying a Euploid-Aneuploid Phenotypic Switch

ORGANISM
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SUMMARY
Purpose:To dissect the mechanisms underlying altered gene expression in aneuploids, we measured transcript abundance in colonies of haploid yeast strain F45 and derived strains, including strains disomic for chromosomes XV and XVI, using RNA-seq. F45 colonies display complex “fluffy” morphologies, while the disomic colonies are smooth, resembling laboratory strains Methods: RNA-seq analysis was carried out on RNA isolated from fully developed S. cerevisiae colonies, grown on solid medium for four days, either in triplicate or quadruplicate. Stranded, paired-end sequencing was carried out in two batches. In the first batch 2x51 bp sequencing was carried out on an Illumina Hiseq2000 and in the second batch 2x75 bp sequencing was carried out on an Illumina NextSeq.  Readpairs were aligned using Bowtie2 (version 2.1.0)with the parameters [-N 1 -I 50 -X 450 -p 6 --reorder -x -S] and allowing 1 mismatch per read. Differential transcription was detected and quantified using EdgeR (v. 3.6.8) Results: Our two disomes displayed similar transcriptional profiles, a phenomenon not driven by their shared smooth colony morphology nor specified purely by the karyotype. Surprisingly, the environmental stress response (ESR) was induced in euploid F45, relative to the two disomes, rather than vice-versa. We also identified genes whose expression reflected a non-linear interaction between the copy number of a transcriptional regulatory gene on chromosome XVI, DIG1, and the copy number of other chromosome XVI genes. DIG1 and the remaining chromosome XVI genes also demonstrated distinct contributions to the effect of the chromosome XVI disome on ESR gene expression. Conclusions: Expression changes in aneuploids reflect a mixture of effects shared between different aneuploidies, including stress responses, and effects unique to perturbing the copy number of particular chromosomes, including non-linear copy number interactions between genes. The balance between these two phenomena is likely to be genotype and environment specific.

DESIGN
mRNA profiles of 4 day old haploid F45 colonies, and colonies derived from F45 were generated by deep sequencing, in triplicate or quadruplicate, using Illumina Hiseq2000 or Illumina Nextseq sequencing.

