TITLE
Crenolanib in combination with azacitidine abrogates stromal protection and survival of leukemia-initiating cells in FLT3-ITD+ AML

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
Effectively targeting leukemia-initiating cells (LIC) in FLT3-internal-tandem-duplication (ITD)-mutated acute myeloid leukemia (AML) remains a crucial goal for achievement of cure. FLT3 tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) have limited impact as single agents and have thus far been unable to eradicate LIC enriched in the CD34+CD38- bone marrow compartment and protected by contact with niche cells.Using primary AML samples in vitro as well as in an in vivo xenograft model, we investigated whether combining the novel FLT3-selective TKI crenolanib with the hypomethylating agent azacitidine (AZA) can eliminate LIC in FLT3-ITD+ AML and determined whether efficacy of this combination is dependent on coexisting genetic mutations in DNMT3A, NPM1 and TET2. Our data show that crenolanib as a single agent was unable to target FLT3-ITD+ LIC in contact with niche cells while the addition of AZA overcame stromal protection and resulted in dramatically reduced clonogenic capacity of FLT3-ITD+ LIC in vitro as well as severely impaired engraftment capacity of FLT3-ITD+ LIC in NSG mice. Strikingly, FLT3-mutated AML samples harboring concurrent TET2 mutations were completely resistant to crenolanib as a single agent. Mutations in DNMT3A or NPM1 had no influence on response to crenolanib while DNMT3A mutations conferred increased sensitivity of FLT3-ITD+ LIC to AZA. Our data suggest that response to crenolanib or AZA as single agents in FLT3-ITD+ AML is highly dependent on coexisting mutations in epigenetic regulators. However, the combination of AZA + crenolanib effectively eliminated FLT3-ITD+ LIC irrespective of additional mutations in NPM1, DNMT3A or TET2.

DESIGN
EL08 and PDX cells were co-cultured ind the presence of Crenolanib and AZA or a combination of both. RNA-seq was performed on EL08 and PDX cells after separation. Controls includes EL08 cells before co-culture as well as co-cultured EL08 and PDX treated with DMSO.

