TITLE
Rnf41 is associated with anxiety like behavior, major depression and beta carboline induced seizure

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
The molecular etiology of invididual differences in complex behavior traits and susceptibility to psychiatric illness remains incomplete. Using an unbiased genetic approach in a mouse model, Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL) influencing anxiety-like behaviors and beta-carboline-induced seizure vulnerability have been mapped to the distal portion of mouse chromosome 10 and an interval specific congenic strain (ISCS; A.B6chr10; 66 cM to telomere) was developed. This A.B6chr10 strain facilitated defining the behavioral influences of this region as well as gene expression profiling to identify candidate gene(s) underlying this QTL. By microarray studies, an unsuspected E3 Ubiquitin Ligase, Ring Finger 41 (Rnf41 / Neuregulin Receptor Degrading Protein1; Nrdp1) was differentially expressed in the region of interest, comparing the hippocampi of A/J vs A.B6chr10 mice as well as A/J vs B6 mice. By RT-PCR, Rnf41 expression levels were significantly increased 1.5 and 1.3-fold in the hippocampi of C57BL6/J and A.B6chr10 mice compared to A/J mice, respectively. In addition, protein levels of Rnf41 were increased in hippocampi of B6 mice compared to A/J mice across postnatal development with a 5.5-fold difference at P56. Among LxS recombinant inbred mice (N=33), Rnf41 hippocampal mRNA expression levels were significantly correlated with open field behavior (r= .454, p=.0073). Re-analyzing a microarray database of human post-mortem prefrontal cortex (Brodmann’s Area 46/10), RNF41 mRNA expression levels were reduced significantly in patients with major depression and bipolar disorder compared to unaffected controls. Overall, Rnf41 is a pleiotropic candidate gene for anxiety-like behaviors, depression, and vulnerability to seizures. RNF41 and its binding partners provide novel etiological pathways for influencing behavior, highlighting a potential role for the ubiquitin proteasome system in psychiatric illness. Keywords: strain difference, genetic variation

