TITLE
Effect of the liver carcinogens aflatoxin B1 and methapyrilene on transcriptomic profiles in HepaRG cells.

ORGANISM
Homo sapiens

SUMMARY
The exponentially growing number of environmental and pharmaceutical agents urges the need for the development of reliable time- and cost-effective novel approaches for the carcinogen detection and identification. In light of this, the utility of high throughput microarray gene expression profiling for the identification of genotoxic and non-genotoxic carcinogens in vitro was investigated. Human terminally differentiated hepatic HepaRG cells were treated with model liver carcinogens, genotoxic carcinogen aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) and non-genotoxic carcinogen methapyrilene, at non-cytotoxic IC10 concentrations for 72 hours, and transcriptomic profiles were determined. Treatment of HepaRG cells with AFB1 and methapyrilene resulted in altered expression of 538 and 1255 genes (p-value ≤ 0.01 and fold change ≥2.0), respectively. Pathway analysis of transcriptomic signatures in treated cells demonstrated a strong enrichment in genes involved in key carcinogen-associated pathways, including receptor-mediated effects, detoxification response, cell death, cell survival and proliferation, oxidative stress and inflammation. Importantly, DNA damage and repair, cell cycle progression, and cell cycle checkpoint control pathways were uniquely activated in AFB1-treated HepaRG cells, whereas receptor-mediated signaling detoxification response pathway was predominantly altered in methapyrilene-treated HepaRG cells. In summary, a high throughput microarray gene expression analysis identified carcinogen-exposure-specific transcriptomic responses and affected molecular pathways associated with carcinogen exposure in a short-term in vitro test.

DESIGN
Twenty-eight days after the initial seeding, the terminally differentiated HepaRG cells were treated with 5µM (IC10) AFB1 or 650 µM (IC10) methapyrilene. Gene expression profiles in the HepaRG cells treated with AFB1 and methapyrilene for 72 hours were investigated.

