TITLE
Shared and unique transcriptomic changes in chickpea in response to concurrent drought stress and Ralstonia solanacearum pathogen

ORGANISM
Cicer arietinum

SUMMARY
Chickpea (Cicer arietinum) is the third largest legume grown worldwide and are prone to drought and various pathogen infections. These stresses often occur concurrently in the field conditions. Previous studies in other plant species indicated that plant senses concurrently occurring stresses as new state of stress however, the molecular events in response to that is largely unknown. In the present study, we studied the transcriptome changes in chickpea plants exposed to combination of drought stress and a potential wilt pathogen, Ralstonia solanacearum by microarray analysis. Chickpea plants were exposed to short duration individual drought (SD-drought, soil field capacity, FC-35%), long duration individual drought (LD-drought, FC-30%), short duration individual pathogen stress (SD-pathogen = 2 days pathogen infection), long duration individual pathogen stress (LD-pathogen = 4 days of infection) and short duration and long duration combined stress, SD-combined = 2 days of pathogen infection with progressive drought (FC-40% to FC- 35%), LD combined = 4 days of pathogen infection with progressive drought (FC-35% to 30%).Transcriptome analysis for the leaf samples from above treatment were done by microarray analysis using Agilent ChickpeaGXP_8X60K chip. Result indicated presence of specific molecular events and also some common but tailored events in response to combined stress. Global transcriptional analysis in chickpea leaves exposed to individual and combined drought stress and Ralstonia solanacearum infection.

DESIGN
Transcriptome analysis was done in the leaf samples of individual and combined stress treated plants by microarray analysis using Agilent ChickpeaGXP_8X60K chip. Chickpea plants were exposed to short duration individual drought (SD-drought, soil field capacity, FC-35%), long duration individual drought (LD-drought, FC-30%), short duration individual pathogen stress (SD-pathogen = 2 days pathogen infection), long duration individual pathogen stress (LD-pathogen = 4 days of infection) and short duration and long duration combined stress, SD-combined = 2 days of pathogen infection with progressive drought (FC-40% to FC- 35%), LD combined = 4 days of pathogen infection with progressive drought (FC-35% to 30%). Two biological replicates were hybridized for each treatment.

