TITLE
Arraystar lncRNA and mRNA array data for dorsal root ganglia neurons of mice

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Nerve injury induces long-lasting pathological pain, namely neuropathic pain (NP), which is dysfunction of the whole pain transmission process, including dorsal root ganglia (DRG) in peripheral nerve system (PNS). Melatonin is well known over a long period of time as hormone of circadian rhythm closely related with the various aspects of pain conditions. Melatonin and melatonin related receptors (MTR1A and MTR1B) exerted amazing analgesic effect in many acute and chronic pain experimental studies, including electrically induced pain, thermally induced pain, mechanical induction of pain and chemical induction of pain. However, the anti-nociceptive action of melatonin in NP is still controversial and unclear. In the present study, our research firstly demonstrated the expression of melatonin receptors in the DRGs, and what more interesting is that MTR1A and MTR1B have a completely different cell type location (MTR1A in the satellite cells and MTR1B in the neurons). In order to get a basic glance at the effects of melatonin and MTR1B on the DRG neurons, a microarray analysis is applied to screen the pain related different expression genes in the primary DRGs cultured neurons with treatment of 1mM melatonin, 100μM MTR1B agonist 8-M-PDOT or vehicle (1% ethanol of normal saline). Subsequent examination was performed, and the finding suggested that melatonin suppressed neuropathic pain via MTR1B dependent and independent pathways in dorsal root ganglia neurons. And MTR1B in DRG may be a potential therapeutic target for NP.

DESIGN
Arraystar arrays were performed according to the manufacturer's directions on RNA extracted from primary DRG neurons culture. The primary DRG neurons were cultured and treated with 1mM melatonin, 100μM MTR1B agonist 8-M-PDOT or vehicle (1% ethanol of normal saline). Total RNA was extracted from each sample using TRizol Reagent according to the protocol from manufacturer. RNA quantity and quality were measured by NanoDrop ND-1000. RNA integrity was assessed by standard denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis. Arraystar Mouse mRNA and ncRNA Microarray V3.0 is applied for the global profiling of mouse lncRNAs and protein-coding transcripts. About 35,923 lncRNAs and 24,881 coding transcripts can be detected by our third-generation mRNA and lncRNA microarray. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) of 1mM melatonin group (between 1mM melatonin and vehicle treatment) and 100μM 8-M-PDOT group (between 100μM 8-M-PDOT and vehicle treatment) were identified through the random variance model. A p-value was calculated using the paired t-test. The threshold set for up- and down-regulated genes was a fold change ≥ 2.0. The GO and pathway analyses were performed and the pain related GO terms were picked up for subsequent examination.

