TITLE
De Novo Fatty Acid Synthesis Drives Early CD4 Memory T Cell Differentiation from Effector T cells

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
Malaria is caused by infection with the Plasmodium spp. parasite, and both T and B cells are required to clear infection over more than two weeks in the absence of treatment. The mechanisms underlying development and maintenance of memory T cells (Tmem) generated by chronic infection are not well-understood, but are critical for the development of vaccines for malaria, tuberculosis and HCV. Previous work shows that fatty acid oxidation promotes memory T cell numbers and function in the late stages of resting memory T cell generation, however little is known about metabolic decision points earlier in this differentiation pathway. We have defined a pathway of differentiation for CD4 effector memory T cells defining early precursors in malaria infection. In this study, we investigate the role of metabolism in CD4 Tmem in P. chabaudi malaria infection, a model of human malaria. We observe a relative upregulation of fatty acid synthesis (FAS) genes in CD4 Tmem compared to effector T cells (Teff). Suppression of the FAS pathway, using an inhibitor of Acc1, the first enzyme in fatty acid synthesis, impairs CD4 memory T cell development in the earliest stages of differentiation. In the first three days of T cell activation inhibition of Acc1 reduces the number of Tmem precursors and concomitantly increases Teff proliferation. The early blockade of FAS also decreases parasitemia. These data suggest that the FAS pathway drives early differentiation of CD4 memory T cells, as distinct from the Teff with high rates of glycolysis, determining protection from malaria infection.

DESIGN
B5 TCR Tg mice were infected with P. chabaudi. Effector and memory T cells subsets were sorted at day 8 and d60 post infection respectively. Naïve T cells from uninfected mice were sorted as well. Gene expression was measured in three effector subsets, three memory subsets and  and naive T cells. Two replicates were performed using different donors for each experiment.

