TITLE
Diurnal regulation of RNA polymerase III transcription is under the control of both feeding-fasting response and circadian clock [ChIP-Seq]

ORGANISM
Mus musculus

SUMMARY
RNA polymerase III (pol III) synthesizes short non-coding RNAs, many of which, including tRNAs, Rpph1 RNA, Rn5s rRNA, and Rmrp RNA, are essential for translation. Accordingly, pol III activity is tightly regulated with cell growth and proliferation by factors such as MYC, RB1, TRP53, and MAF1. MAF1 is a repressor of pol III transcription whose activity is controlled by phosphorylation; in particular, it is inactivated through phosphorylation by mTORC1 kinase, a sensor of nutrient availability. Pol III regulation is thus sensitive to environmental cues, yet a diurnal profile of pol III transcription activity is so far lacking. Here we document pol III occupancy of its target genes in mouse liver during the diurnal cycle and show that pol III occupancy rises before the onset of the night, stays high during the night, when mice normally ingest food and when translation is increased, and decreases in daytime. By comparing diurnal pol III occupancy in wild-type mice, arrhythmic mice owing to inactivation of the Arntl gene, mice fed at regular intervals during both night and day, and mice lacking the Maf1 gene, we show that whereas higher pol III occupancy during the night reflects a MAF1-dependent response to feeding, the rise of pol III occupancy before the onset of the night reflects a circadian clock-dependent response. Thus, pol III transcription during the diurnal cycle is regulated both in response to nutrients and by the circadian clock, which allows anticipatory pol III transcription.

DESIGN
To characterize RNA polymerase III occupancy in our mice models, liver were collected from control mice, constantly fed mice, Arntl KO mice, and Maf1 KO mice every 4 hours during 2 consecutive days. Chromatin was isolated and an antibody directed against one of the RNA polymerase III subunit (RPC4) was used to perform the immunoprecipitation step. DNA fragments were then sequenced and enrichment in Pol III loci was calculated.

